<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>The Old Maid</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<article data-parent="story-1" id="the-old-maid" epub:type="part">
			<header>
				<h3 epub:type="title">The Old Maid</h3>
				<p epub:type="dedication">To <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Eugène Auguste Georges Louis Midy de la Greneraye Surville, Civil Engineer of the Corps Royal, a token of affection from his brother-in-law.</p>
				<p epub:type="z3998:sender z3998:signature">De Balzac.</p>
			</header>
			<p>Plenty of people must have come across at least one Chevalier de Valois in the provinces; there was one in Normandy, another was extant at Bourges, a third flourished at Alençon in the year 1816, and the South very likely possessed one of its own. But we are not here concerned with the numbering of the Valois tribe. Some of them, no doubt, were about as much of Valois as Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span> was a Bourbon; and every Chevalier was so slightly acquainted with the rest, that it was anything but politic to mention one of them when speaking to another. All of them, however, agreed to leave the Bourbons in perfect tranquillity on the throne of France, for it is a little too well proven that Henri <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span> succeeded to the crown in default of heirs male in the Orléans, otherwise the Valois branch; so that if any Valois exist at all, they must be descendants of Charles of Valois, Duke of Angoulême, and Marie Touchet; and even there the direct line was extinct (unless proof to the contrary is forthcoming) in the person of the Abbé de Rothelin. As for the Valois Saint-Remy, descended from Henri <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>, they likewise came to an end with the too famous Lamothe-Valois of the Diamond Necklace affair.</p>
			<p>Every one of the Chevaliers, if information is correct, was, like the Chevalier of Alençon, an elderly noble, tall, lean, and without fortune. The Bourges Chevalier had emigrated, the Touraine Valois went into hiding during the Revolution, and the Alençon Chevalier was mixed up in the Vendéan war, and implicated to some extent in Chouannerie. The last-named gentleman spent the most part of his youth in Paris, where, at the age of thirty, the Revolution broke in upon his career of conquests. Accepted as a true Valois by persons of the highest quality in his province, the Chevalier de Valois d’Alençon (like his namesakes) was remarkable for his fine manners, and had evidently been accustomed to move in the best society.</p>
			<p>He dined out every day, and played cards of an evening, and, thanks to one of his weaknesses, was regarded as a great wit; he had a habit of relating a host of anecdotes of the times of Louis Quinze, and those who heard his stories for the first time thought them passably well narrated. The Chevalier de Valois, moreover, had one virtue; he refrained from repeating his own good sayings, and never alluded to his conquests, albeit his smiles and airs were delightfully indiscreet. The old gentleman took full advantage of the old-fashioned Voltairean noble’s privilege of staying away from Mass, but his irreligion was very tenderly dealt with out of regard for his devotion to the Royalist cause.</p>
			<p>One of his most remarkable graces (Molé must have learned it of him) was his way of taking snuff from an old-fashioned snuffbox with a portrait of a lady on the lid. The Princess Goritza, a lovely Hungarian, had been famous for her beauty towards the end of the reign of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>; and the Chevalier could never speak without emotion of the foreign great lady whom he loved in his youth, for whom he had fought a duel with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Lauzun.</p>
			<p>But by this time the Chevalier had lived fifty-eight years, and if he owned to but fifty of them, he might safely indulge himself in that harmless deceit. Thin, fair-complexioned men, among other privileges, retain that youthfulness of shape which in men, as in women, contributes as much as anything to stave off any appearance of age. And, indeed, it is a fact that all the life, or rather, all the grace, which is the expression of life, lies in the figure. Among the Chevalier’s personal traits, mention must be made of the portentous nose with which Nature had endowed him. It cut a pallid countenance sharply into two sections which seemed to have nothing to do with each other; so much so, indeed, that only one-half of his face would flush with the exertion of digestion after dinner; all the glow being confined to the left side, a phenomenon worthy of note in times when physiology is so much occupied with the human heart. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois’ health was not apparently robust, judging by his long, thin legs, lean frame, and sallow complexion; but he ate like an ogre, alleging, doubtless by way of excuse for his voracity, that he suffered from a complaint known in the provinces as a “hot liver.” The flush on his left cheek confirmed the story; but in a land where meals are developed on the lines of thirty or forty dishes, and last for four hours at a stretch, the Chevalier’s abnormal appetite might well seem to be a special mark of the favor of Providence vouchsafed to the good town. That flush on the left cheek, according to divers medical authorities, is a sign of prodigality of heart; and, indeed, the Chevalier’s past record of gallantry might seem to confirm a professional dictum for which the present chronicler (most fortunately) is in nowise responsible. But in spite of these symptoms, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois was of nervous temperament, and in consequence long-lived; and if his liver was hot, to use the old-fashioned phrase, his heart was not a whit less inflammable. If there was a line worn here and there in his face, and a silver thread or so in his hair, an experienced eye would have discerned in these signs and tokens the stigmata of desire, the furrows traced by past pleasure. And, in fact, in his face, the unmistakable marks of the crow’s foot and the serpent’s tooth took the shape of the delicate wrinkles so prized at the court of Cytherea.</p>
			<p>Everything about the gallant Chevalier revealed the “ladies’ man.” So minutely careful was he over his ablutions, that it was a pleasure to see his cheeks; they might have been brushed over with some miraculous water. That portion of his head which the hair refused to hide from view shone like ivory. His eyebrows, like his hair, had a youthful look, so carefully was their growth trained and regulated by the comb. A naturally fair skin seemed to be yet further whitened by some mysterious preparation; and while the Chevalier never used scent, there was about him, as it were, a perfume of youth which enhanced the freshness of his looks. His hands, that told of race, were as carefully kept as if they belonged to some coxcomb of the gentler sex; you could not help noticing those rose-pink neatly-trimmed fingernails. Indeed, but for his lordly superlative nose, the Chevalier would have looked like a doll.</p>
			<p>It takes some resolution to spoil this portrait with the admission of a foible; the Chevalier put cotton wool in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Ms.</abbr> ears, and still continued to wear earrings⁠—two tiny negroes’ heads set with brilliants. They were of admirable workmanship, it is true, and their owner was so far attached to the singular appendages, that he used to justify his fancy by saying “that his sick headaches had left him since his ears were pierced.” He used to suffer from sick headaches. The Chevalier is not held up as a flawless character; but even if an old bachelor’s heart sends too much blood to his face, is he never therefore to be forgiven for his adorable absurdities? Perhaps (who knows?) there are sublime secrets hidden away beneath them. And besides, the Chevalier de Valois made amends for his negroes’ heads with such a variety of other and different charms, that society ought to have felt itself sufficiently compensated. He really was at great pains to conceal his age and to make himself agreeable.</p>
			<p>First and foremost, witness the extreme care which he gave to his linen, the one distinction in dress which a gentleman may permit himself in modern days. The Chevalier’s linen was invariably fine and white, as befitted a noble. His coat, though remarkably neat, was always somewhat worn, but spotless and uncreased. The preservation of this garment bordered on the miraculous in the opinion of those who noticed the Chevalier’s elegant indifference on this head; not that he went so far as to scrape his clothes with broken glass (a refinement invented by the Prince of Wales), but he set himself to carry out the first principles of dress as laid down by Englishmen of the very highest and finest fashion, and this with a personal element of coxcombry which Alençon was scarcely capable of appreciating. Does the world owe no esteem to those that take such pains for it? And what was all this labor but the fulfilment of that very hardest of sayings in the Gospel, which bids us return good for evil? The freshness of the toilet, the care for dress, suited well with the Chevalier’s blue eyes, ivory teeth, and bland personality; still, the superannuated Adonis had nothing masculine in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Ms.</abbr> appearance, and it would seem that he employed the illusion of the toilet to hide the ravages of other than military campaigns.</p>
			<p>To tell the whole truth, the Chevalier had a voice singularly at variance with his delicate fairness. So full was it and sonorous, that you would have been startled by the sound of it unless, with certain observers of human nature, you held the theory that the voice was only what might be expected of such a nose. With something less of volume than a giant double-bass, it was a full, pleasant baritone, reminding you of the hautboy among musical instruments, sweet and resistant, deep and rich.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois had discarded the absurd costume still worn by a few antiquated Royalists, and frankly modernized his dress. He always appeared in a maroon coat with gilt buttons, loosely-fitting breeches with gold buckles at the knees, a white sprigged waistcoat, a tight stock, and a collarless shirt; this being a last vestige of eighteenth century costume, which its wearer was the less willing to relinquish because it enabled him to display a throat not unworthy of a lay abbé. Square gold buckles of a kind unknown to the present generation shone conspicuous upon his patent leather shoes. Two watch chains hung in view in parallel lines from a couple of fobs, another survival of an eighteenth century mode which the incroyable did not disdain to copy in the time of the Directory. This costume of a transition period, reuniting two centuries, was worn by the Chevalier Math the grace of an old-world marquis, a grace lost to the French stage since Molé’s last pupil, Fleury, retired from the boards and took his secret with him.</p>
			<p>The old bachelor’s private life, seemingly open to all eyes, was in reality inscrutable. He lived in a modest lodging (to say the least of it) up two pairs of stairs in a house in the Rue du Cours, his landlady being the laundress most in request in Alençon⁠—which fact explains the extreme elegance of the Chevalier’s linen. Ill luck was so to order it that Alençon one day could actually believe that he had not always conducted himself as befitted a man of his quality, and that in his old age he privately married one Césarine, the mother of an infant which had the impertinence to come without being called.</p>
			<p>“He gave his hand to her who for so long had lent her hand to iron his linen,” said a certain <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier.</p>
			<p>The sensitive noble’s last days were the more vexed by this unpleasant scandal, because, as shall be shown in the course of this present Scene, he had already lost a long-cherished hope for which he had made many a sacrifice.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Lardot’s two rooms were let to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Chevalier de Valois at the moderate rent of a hundred francs per annum. The worthy gentleman dined out every night, and only came home to sleep; he was therefore at charges for nothing but his breakfast, which always consisted of a cup of chocolate with butter and fruit, according to the season. A fire was never lighted in his rooms except in the very coldest winters, and then only while he was dressing. Between the hours of eleven and four <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois took his walks abroad, read the newspapers, and paid calls.</p>
			<p>When the Chevalier first settled in Alençon, he magnanimously owned that he had nothing but an annuity of six hundred livres paid in quarterly instalments by his old man of business, with whom the certificates were deposited. This was all that remained of his former wealth. And every three months, in fact, a banker in the town paid him a hundred and fifty francs remitted by one <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Bordin of Paris, the last of the <i xml:lang="fr">procureurs du Châtelet</i>. These particulars everybody knew, for the Chevalier had taken care to ask his confidant to keep the matter a profound secret. He reaped the fruits of his misfortunes. A cover was laid for him in all the best houses in Alençon; he was asked to every evening party. His talents as a cardplayer, a teller of anecdotes, a pleasant and well-bred man of the world, were so thoroughly appreciated that an evening was spoiled if the connoisseur of the town was not present. The host and hostess and all the ladies present missed his little approving grimace. “You are adorably well dressed,” from the old bachelor’s lips, was sweeter to a young woman in a ballroom than the sight of her rival’s despair.</p>
			<p>There were certain old-world expressions which no one could pronounce so well. “My heart,” “my jewel,” “my little love,” “my queen,” and all the dear diminutives of the year 1770 took an irresistible charm from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois’ lips; in short, the privilege of superlatives was his. His compliments, of which, moreover, he was chary, won him the goodwill of the elderly ladies; he flattered everyone down to the officials of whom he had no need.</p>
			<p>He was so fine a gentleman at the card-table, that his behavior would have marked him out anywhere. He never complained; when his opponents lost he praised their play; he never undertook the education of his partners by showing them what they ought to have done. If a nauseating discussion of this kind began while the cards were making, the Chevalier brought out his snuffbox with a gesture worthy of Molé, looked at the Princess Goritza’s portrait, took off the lid in a stately manner, heaped up a pinch, rubbed it to a fine powder between finger and thumb, blew off the light particles, shaped a little cone in his hand, and by the time the cards were dealt he had replenished the cavities in his nostrils and replaced the Princess in his waistcoat pocket⁠—always to the left-hand side.</p>
			<p>None but a noble of the Gracious as distinguished from the Great Century could have invented such a compromise between a disdainful silence and an epigram which would have passed over the heads of his company. The Chevalier took dull minds as he found them, and knew how to turn them to account. His irresistible evenness of temper caused many a one to say, “I admire the Chevalier de Valois!” Everything about him, his conversation and his manner, seemed in keeping with his mild appearance. He was careful to come into collision with no one, man or woman. Indulgent with deformity as with defects of intellect, he listened patiently (with the help of the Princess Goritza) to tales of the little woes of life in a country town; to anecdotes of the undercooked egg at breakfast, or the sour cream in the coffee; to small grotesque details of physical ailments; to tales of dreams and visitations and wakings with a start. The Chevalier was an exquisite listener. He had a languishing glance, a stock attitude to denote compassion; he put in his “Ohs” and “Poohs” and “What-did-you-dos?” with charming appropriateness. Till his dying day no one ever suspected that while these avalanches of nonsense lasted, the Chevalier in his own mind was rehearsing the warmest passages of an old romance, of which the Princess Goritza was the heroine. Has anyone ever given a thought to the social uses of extinct sentiment?⁠—or guessed in how many indirect ways love benefits humanity?</p>
			<p>Possibly this listener’s faculty sufficiently explains the Chevalier’s popularity; he was always the spoiled child of the town, although he never quitted a drawing-room without carrying off about five livres in his pocket. Sometimes he lost, and he made the most of his losses, but it very seldom happened. All those who knew him say with one accord that never in any place have they met with so agreeable a mummy, not even in the Egyptian museum at Turin. Surely in no known country of the globe did parasite appear in such a benignant shape. Never did selfishness in its most concentrated form show itself so inoffensive, so full of good offices as in this gentleman; the Chevalier’s egoism was as good as another man’s devoted friendship. If any person went to ask <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois to do some trifling service which the worthy Chevalier could not perform without inconvenience, that person never went away without conceiving a great liking for him, and departed fully convinced that the Chevalier could do nothing in the matter, or might do harm if he meddled with it.</p>
			<p>To explain this problematical existence the chronicler is bound to admit, while Truth⁠—that ruthless debauchee⁠—has caught him by the throat, that latterly after the three sad, glorious Days of July, Alençon discovered that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois’ winnings at cards amounted to something like a hundred and fifty crowns every quarter, which amount the ingenious Chevalier intrepidly remitted to himself as an annuity, so that he might not appear to be without resources in a country with a great turn for practical details. Plenty of his friends⁠—he was dead by that time, please to remark⁠—plenty of his friends denied this <i xml:lang="la">in toto</i>, they maintained that the stories were fables and slanders set in circulation by the Liberal party and that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois was an honorable and worthy gentleman. Luckily for clever gamblers, there will always be champions of this sort for them among the onlookers. Feeling ashamed to excuse wrongdoing, they stoutly deny that wrong has been done. Do not accuse them of wrong-headedness; they have their own sense of self-respect, and the Government sets them an example of the virtue which consists in burying its dead by night without chanting a Te Deum over a defeat. And suppose that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois permitted himself a neat stratagem that would have won Gramont’s esteem, a smile from Baron de Foeneste, and a shake of the hand from the Marquis de Moncade, was he any the less the pleasant dinner guest, the wit, the unvarying cardplayer, she charming retailer of anecdotes, the delight of Alençon? In what, moreover, does the action, lying, as it does, outside the laws of right and wrong, offend against the elegant code of a man of birth and breeding? When so many people are obliged to give pensions to others, what more natural than of one’s own accord to allow an annuity to one’s own best friend? But Laius is dead.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>After some fifteen years of this kind of life, the Chevalier had amassed ten thousand and some odd hundred francs. When the Bourbons returned, he said that an old friend of his, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Marquis de Pombreton, late a lieutenant in the Black Musketeers, had returned a loan of twelve hundred pistoles with which he emigrated. The incident made a sensation. It was quoted afterwards as a set-off against droll stories in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper" xml:lang="fr">Constitutionnel</i> of the ways in which some émigrés paid their debts. The poor Chevalier used to blush all over the right side of his face whenever this noble trait in the Marquis de Pombreton came up in conversation. At the time everyone rejoiced with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois; he used to consult capitalists as to the best way of investing this wreck of his former fortune; and, putting faith in the Restoration, invested it all in Government stock when the funds had fallen to fifty-six francs twenty-five centimes. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">MM.</abbr> de Lenoncourt, de Navarreins, de Verneuil, de Fontaine, and La Billardière, to whom he was known, had obtained a pension of a hundred crowns for him from the privy purse, he said, and the Cross of <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis. By what means the old Chevalier obtained the two solemn confirmations of his title and quality, no one ever knew; but this much is certain, the Cross of <abbr>St.</abbr> Louis gave him brevet rank as a colonel on a retiring pension, by reason of his services with the Catholic army in the West.⁠—”</p>
			<p>Besides the fiction of the annuity, to which no one gave a thought, the Chevalier was now actually possessed of a genuine income of a thousand francs. But with this improvement in his circumstances he made no change in his life or manners; only⁠—the red ribbon looked wondrous well on his maroon coat; it was a finishing touch, as it were, to this portrait of a gentleman. Ever since the year 1803 the Chevalier had scaled his letters with an ancient gold seal, engraved roughly enough, but not so badly but that the Castérans, d’Esgrignons, and Troisvilles might see that he bore the arms of France impaled with his own, to wit, France per pale, gules two bars gemelles, a cross of five mascles conjoined or, on a chief sable a cross pattee argent over all; with a knight’s casquet for crest and the motto⁠—<b>Valeo</b>. With these noble arms the so-called bastard Valois was entitled to ride in all the royal coaches in the world.</p>
			<p>Plenty of people envied the old bachelor his easy life, made up of boston, trictrac, reversis, whist, and piquet; of good play, dinners well digested, pinches of snuff gracefully taken, and quiet walks abroad. Almost all Alençon thought that his existence was empty alike of ambitions and cares; but where is the man whose life is quite as simple as they suppose who envy him?</p>
			<p>In the remotest country village you shall find human mollusks, rotifers inanimate to all appearance, which cherish a passion for lepidoptera or conchology, and are at infinite pains to acquire some new butterfly, or a specimen of <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Concha Veneris</i>. And the Chevalier had not merely shells and butterflies of his own, he cherished an ambitious desire with a pertinacity and profound strategy worthy of a Sixtus <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. He meant to marry a rich old maid; in all probability because a wealthy marriage would be a stepping-stone to the high spheres of the Court. This was the secret of his royal bearing and prolonged abode in Alençon.</p>
			<p>Very early one Tuesday morning in the middle of spring in the year ’16 (to use his own expression), the Chevalier was just slipping on his dressing-gown, an old-fashioned green silk damask of a flowered pattern, when, in spite of the cotton in his ears, he heard a girl’s light footstep on the stairs.. In another moment someone tapped discreetly three times on the door, and then, without waiting for an answer, a very handsome damsel slipped like a snake into the old bachelor’s apartment.</p>
			<p>“Ah, Suzanne, is that you?” said the Chevalier de Valois, continuing to strop his razor. “What are you here for, deal little jewel of mischief?”</p>
			<p>“I have come to tell you something which, perhaps will give you as much pleasure as annoyance.”</p>
			<p>“Is it something about Césarine?”</p>
			<p>“Much I trouble myself about your Césarine,” pouted she, half careless, half in earnest.</p>
			<p>The charming Suzanne, whose escapade was to exercise so great an influence on the lives of all the principal characters in this story, was one of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Lardot’s laundry girls. And now for a few topographical details.</p>
			<p>The whole ground floor of the house was given up to the laundry. The little yard was a drying-ground where embroidered handkerchiefs, collarettes, muslin slips, cuffs, frilled shirts, cravats, laces, embroidered petticoats, all the fine washing of the best houses in the town, in short, hung out along the lines of hair rope. The Chevalier used to say that he was kept informed of the progress of the receiver-general’s wife’s flirtations by the number of slips thus brought to light; and the amount of frilled shirts and cambric cravats varied directly with the petticoats and collarettes. By this system of double entry, as it were, he detected all the assignations in the town; but the Chevalier was always discreet, he never let fall an epigram that might have closed a house to him. And yet he was a witty talker! For which reason you may be sure that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois’ manners were of the finest, while his talents, as so often happens, were thrown away upon a narrow circle. Still, for he was only human after all, he sometimes could not resist the pleasure of a searching side glance which made women tremble, and nevertheless they liked him when they found out how profoundly discreet he was, how full of sympathy for their pretty frailties.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Lardot’s forewoman and factotum, an alarmingly ugly spinster of five-and-forty, occupied the rest of the second floor with the Chevalier. Her door on the landing was exactly opposite his; and her apartment, like his own, consisted of two rooms, looking respectively upon the street and the yard. Above, there was nothing but the attics where the linen was dried in winter. Below lodged <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Lardot’s grandfather. The old man, Grevin by name, had been a privateer in his time, and had served under Admiral Simeuse in the Indies; now he was paralyzed and stone deaf. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Lardot herself occupied the rooms beneath her forewoman, and so great was her weakness for people of condition, that she might be said to be blind where the Chevalier was concerned. In her eyes, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois was an absolute monarch, a king that could do no wrong; even if one of her own workgirls had been said to be guilty of finding favor in his sight, she would have said, “He is so amiable!”</p>
			<p>And so, if <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois, like most people in the provinces, lived in a glass house, it was secret as a robber’s cave so far as he at least was concerned. A born confidant of the little intrigues of the laundry, he never passed the door⁠—which almost always stood ajar⁠—without bringing something for his pets⁠—chocolate, bonbons, ribbons, laces, a gilt cross, and the jokes that grisettes love. Wherefore the little girls adored the Chevalier. Women can tell by instinct whether a man is attracted to anything that wears a petticoat; they know at once the kind of man who enjoys the mere sense of their presence, who never thinks of making blundering demands of repayment for his gallantry. In this respect womankind has a canine faculty; a dog in any company goes straight to the man who respects animals. The Chevalier de Valois in his poverty preserved something of his former life; he was as unable to live without some fair one under his protection as any <i xml:lang="fr">grand seigneur</i> of a bygone age. He clung to the traditions of the <i xml:lang="fr">petite maison</i>. He loved to give to women, and women alone can receive gracefully, perhaps because it is always in their power to repay.</p>
			<p>In these days, when every lad on leaving school tries his hand at unearthing symbols or sifting legends, is it not extraordinary that no one has explained that portent, the Courtesan of the Eighteenth Century? What was she but the tournament of the Sixteenth in another shape? In 1550 the knights displayed their prowess for their ladies; in 1750 they displayed their mistresses at Longchamps; today they ran their horses over the course. The noble of every age has done his best to invent a life which he, and he only, can live. The painted shoes of the Fourteenth Century are the <i xml:lang="fr">talons rouges</i> of the Eighteenth; the parade of a mistress was one fashion in ostentation; the sentiment of chivalry and the knight errant was another.</p>
			<p>The Chevalier de Valois could no longer ruin himself for a mistress, so for bonbons wrapped in bank-bills he politely offered a bag of genuine cracknels; and to the credit of Alençon, be it said, the cracknels caused far more pleasure to the recipients than <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> d’Artois’ presents of carriages or silver-gilt toilet sets ever gave to the fair Duthé. There was not a girl in the laundry but recognized the Chevalier’s fallen greatness, and kept his familiarities in the house a profound secret.</p>
			<p>In answer to questions, they always spoke gravely of the Chevalier de Valois; they watched over him. For others he became a venerable gentleman, his life was a flower of sanctity. But at home they would have lighted on his shoulders like parakeets.</p>
			<p>The Chevalier liked to know the intimate aspects of family life which laundresses learn; they used to go up to his room of a morning to retail the gossip of the town; he called them his “gazettes in petticoats,” his “living feuilletons.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Sartine himself had not such intelligent spies at so cheap a rate, nor yet so loyal in their rascality. Remark, moreover, that the Chevalier thoroughly enjoyed his breakfasts.</p>
			<p>Suzanne was one of his favorites. A clever and ambitious girl with the stuff of a Sophie Arnould in her, she was besides as beautiful as the loveliest courtesan that Titian ever prayed to pose against a background of dark velvet as a model for his <i epub:type="se:name.visual-art.painting">Venus</i>. Her forehead and all the upper part of her face about the eyes were delicately moulded; but the contours of the lower half were east in a commoner mould. Hers was the beauty of a Normande, fresh, plump, and brilliant-complexioned, with that Rubens fleshiness which should be combined with the muscular development of a Farnese Hercules: This was no Venus de’ Medici, the graceful feminine counterpart of Apollo.</p>
			<p>“Well, child,” ’ said the Chevalier, “tell me your adventures little or big.”</p>
			<p>The Chevalier’s fatherly benignity with these grisettes would have marked him out anywhere between Paris and Peking. The girls put him in mind of the courtesans of another age, of the illustrious queens of opera of European fame during a good third of the eighteenth century. Certain it is that he who had lived for so long in a world of women now as dead and forgotten as the Jesuits, the buccaneers, the abbés, and the farmers-general, and all great things generally⁠—certain it is that the Chevalier had acquired an irresistible good humor, a gracious ease, an unconcern, with no trace of egoism discernible in it. So might Jupiter have appeared to Alcmena⁠—a king that chooses to be a woman’s dupe, and flings majesty and its thunderbolts to the winds, that he may squander Olympus in follies, and “little suppers,” and feminine extravagance; wishful, of all things, to be far enough away from Juno.</p>
			<p>The room in which the Chevalier received company was bare enough, with its shabby bit of tapestry to do duty as a carpet, and very dirty, old-fashioned easy-chairs; the walls were covered with a cheap paper, on which the countenances of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span> and his family, framed in weeping willow, appeared at intervals among funeral urns, bearing the <em>sublime testament</em> by way of inscription, amid a whole host of sentimental emblems invented by Royalism under the Terror; but in spite of all this, in spite of the old flowered green silk dressing-gown, in spite of its owner’s air of dilapidation, a certain fragrance of the eighteenth century clung about the Chevalier de Valois as he shaved himself before the old-fashioned toilet glass, covered with cheap lace. All the graceless graces of his youth seemed to reappear; he might have had three hundred thousand francs’ worth of debts to his name, and a chariot at his door. He looked a great man, great as Berthier in the Retreat from Moscow issuing the order of the day to battalions which were no more.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Chevalier,” Suzanne replied archly, “it seems to me that I have nothing to tell you⁠—you have only to look!”</p>
			<p>So saying, she turned and stood sidewise to prove her words by ocular demonstrations; and the Chevalier, deep old gentleman, still holding his razor across his chin, cast his right eye downwards upon the damsel, and pretended to understand.</p>
			<p>“Very good, my little pet, we will have a little talk together presently. But you come first, it seems, to me.”</p>
			<p>“But, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Chevalier, am I to wait till my mother beats me and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Lardot turns me away? If I do not go to Paris at once, I shall never get married here, where the men are so ridiculous.”</p>
			<p>“These things cannot be helped, child! Society changes, and women suffer Just as much as the nobles from the shocking confusion which ensues. Topsy-turvydom in politics ends in topsy-turvy manners. Alas! woman soon will cease to be woman” (here he took the cotton wool out of his ears to continue his toilet). “Women will lose a great deal by plunging into sentiment; they will torture their nerves, and there will be an end of the good old ways of our time, when a little pleasure was desired without blushes, and accepted without more ado, and the vapors” (he polished the earrings with the negroes’ heads)⁠—“the vapors were only known as a means of getting one’s way; before long they will take the proportions of a complaint only to be cured by an infusion of orange-blossoms.” (The Chevalier burst out laughing.) “Marriage, in short,” he resumed, taking a pair of tweezers to pluck out a gray hair, “marriage will come to be a very dull institution indeed, and it was so joyous in my time. The reign of Louis Quatorze and Louis Quinze, bear this in mind, my child, saw the last of the finest manners in the world.”</p>
			<p>“But, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Chevalier,” urged the girl, “it is your little Suzanne’s character and reputation that is at stake, and you are not going to forsake her, I hope!”</p>
			<p>“What is all this?” cried the Chevalier, with a finishing touch to his hair; “I would sooner lose my name!”</p>
			<p>“Ah!” said Suzanne.</p>
			<p>“Listen to me, little masquerader.” He sat down in a large, low chair, a <em>duchess</em>, as it used to be called, which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Lardot had picked up somewhere for her lodger. Then he drew the magnificent Suzanne to him till she stood between his knees; and Suzanne submitted⁠—Suzanne who held her head so high in the streets, and had refused a score of overtures from admirers in Alençon, not so much from self-respect as in disdain of their pettiness. Suzanne so brazenly made the most of the supposed consequences of her errors, that the old sinner, who had fathomed so many mysteries in persons far more astute than Suzanne, saw the real state of affairs at once. He knew well enough that a grisette does not laugh when disgrace is really in question, but he scorned to throw down the scaffolding of an engaging fib with a touch.</p>
			<p>“We are slandering ourselves,” said he, and there was an inimitable subtlety in his smile. “We are as well conducted as the fair one whose name we bear; we can marry without fear. But we do not want to vegetate here; we long for Paris, where charming creatures can be rich if they are clever, and we are not a fool. So we should like to find out whether the City of Pleasure has young Chevaliers de Valois in store for us, and a carriage and diamonds and an opera box. There are Russians and English and Austrians that are bringing millions to spend in Paris, and some of that money mamma settled on us as a marriage portion when she gave us our good looks. And besides, we are patriotic; we should like to help France to find her own money in these gentlemen’s pockets. Eh! eh! my dear little devil’s lamb, all this is not bad. The neighbors will cry out upon you a little at first perhaps, but success will make everything right. The real crime, my child, is poverty; and you and I both suffer for it. As we are not lacking in intelligence, we thought we might turn our dear little reputation to account to take in an old bachelor, but the old bachelor, sweetheart, knows the alpha and omega of woman’s wiles; which is to say, that you would find it easier to put a grain of salt upon a sparrow tail than to persuade me to believe that I have had any share in your affair.</p>
			<p>“Go to Paris, my child, go at the expense of a bachelor’s vanity; I am not going to hinder you, I will help you, for the old bachelor, Suzanne, is the cashbox provided, by nature for a young girl. But do not thrust me into the affair. Now, listen, my queen, understanding life so well as you do⁠—you see, you might do me a good deal of harm and give me trouble; harm, because you might spoil my marriage in a place where people are so particular; trouble on your account, because you will get yourself in a scrape for nothing, a scrape entirely of your own invention, sly girl; and you know, my pet, that I have no money left, I am as poor as a church mouse. Ah! if I were to marry <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, if I were rich again, I would certainly rather have you than Césarine. You were always fine gold enough to gild lead, it seemed to me; you were made to be a great lord’s love; and as I knew you were a clever girl, I am not at all surprised by this trick of yours, I expected as much. For a girl, this means that you burn your boats. It is no common mind, my angel, that can do it; and for that reason you have my esteem,” and he bestowed confirmation upon her cheek after the manner of a bishop, with two fingers.</p>
			<p>“But, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Chevalier, I do assure you that you are mistaken, and⁠—” she blushed, and dared not finish her sentence, at a glance he had seen through her, and read her plans from beginning to end.</p>
			<p>“Yes, I understand, you wish me to believe you. Very well, I believe. But take my advice and go to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier. You have taken <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier’s linen home from the wash for five or six months, have you not?⁠—Very good. I do not ask to know what has happened between you; but I know <em>him</em>, he is vain, he is an old bachelor, he is very rich, he has an income of two thousand five hundred livres, and spends less than eight hundred. If you are the clever girl that I take you for, you will find your way to Paris at his expense. Go to him, my pet, twist him round your fingers, and of all things, be supple as silk, and make a double twist and a knot at every word; he is just the man to be afraid of a scandal; and if he knows that you can make him sit on the stool of repentance⁠—In short, you understand, threaten to apply to the ladies of the charitable fund. He is ambitious besides. Well and good, with a wife to help him there should be nothing beyond a man’s reach; and are you not handsome enough and clever enough to make your husband’s fortune? Why, plague take it, you might hold your own with a court lady.”</p>
			<p>The Chevalier’s last words let the light into Suzanne’s brain; she was burning with impatience to rush off to du Bousquier; but as she could not hurry away too abruptly, she helped the Chevalier to dress, asking questions about Paris as she did so. As for the Chevalier, he saw that his remarks had taken effect, and gave Suzanne an excuse to go, asking her to tell Césarine to bring up the chocolate that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Lardot made for him every morning, and Suzanne forthwith slipped off in search of her prey.</p>
			<p>And here follows du Bousquier’s biography.⁠—He came of an old Alençon family in a middle rank between the burghers and the country squires. On the death of his father, a magistrate in the criminal court, he was left without resource, and, like most ruined provincials, betook himself to Paris to seek his fortune. When the Revolution broke out, du Bousquier was a man of affairs; and in those days (in spite of the Republicans, who are all up in arms for the honesty of their government, the word “affairs” was used very loosely. Political spies, jobbers, and contractors, the men who arranged with the syndics of communes for the sale of the property of émigrés, and then bought up land at low prices to sell again⁠—all these folk, like ministers and generals, were men of affairs.</p>
			<p>From 1793 to 1799 du Bousquier held contracts to supply the army with forage and provisions. During those years he lived in a splendid mansion; he was one of the great capitalists of the time; he went shares with Ouvrard; kept open house and led the scandalous life of the times. A Cincinnatus, reaping where he had not sowed, and rich with stolen rations and sacks of corn, he kept <i xml:lang="fr">petites maisons</i> and a bevy of mistresses, and gave fine entertainments to the directors of the Republic. Citizen du Bousquier was one of Barras’ intimates; he was on the best of terms with Fouché, and hand and glove with Bernadotte. He thought to be a Minister of State one day, and threw himself heart and soul into the party that secretly plotted against Bonaparte before the battle of Marengo. And but for Kellermann’s charge and the death of Desaix, du Bousquier would have played a great part in the state. He was one of the upper members of the permanent staff of the promiscuous government which was driven by Napoleon’s luck to vanish into the side-scenes of 1793.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1" id="noteref-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a></p>
			<p>The victory unexpectedly won by stubborn fighting ended in the downfall of this party; they had placards ready printed, and were only waiting for the First Consul’s defeat to proclaim a return to the principles of the Mountain.</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier, feeling convinced that a victory was impossible, had two special messengers on the battlefield, and speculated with the larger part of his fortune for a fall in the funds. The first courier came with the news that Mélas was victorious; but the second arriving four hours afterwards, at night, brought the tidings of the Austrian defeat. Du Bousquier cursed Kellermann and Desaix; the First Consul owed him millions, he dared not curse him. But between the chance of making millions on the one hand, and stark ruin on the other, he lost his head. For several days he was half idiotic; he had undermined his constitution with excesses to such an extent that the thunderbolt left him helpless. He had something to hope from the settlement of his claims upon the Government; but in spite of bribes, he was made to feel the weight of Napoleon’s displeasure against army contractors who speculated on his defeat. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Fermon, so pleasantly nicknamed “<i xml:lang="fr">Fermons la caisse</i>,” left du Bousquier without a penny. The First Consul was even more incensed by the immorality of his private life and his connection with Barras and Bernadotte than by his speculations on the Bourse; he erased <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier’s name from the list of receivers-general, on which a last remnant of credit had placed him for Alençon.</p>
			<p>Of all his former wealth, nothing now remained to du Bousquier save an income of twelve hundred francs from the funds, an investment entirely due to chance, which saved him from actual want. His creditors, knowing nothing of the results of his liquidation, only left him enough in consols to bring in a thousand francs per annum; but their claims were paid in full after all, when the outstanding debts had been collected, and the Hôtel de Bauséant, du Bousquier’s town house, sold besides. So, after a close shave of bankruptcy, the sometime speculator emerged with his name intact. Preceded by a tremendous reputation due to his relations with former heads of government departments, his manner of life, his brief day of authority, and final ruin through the First Consul, the man interested the city of Alençon, where Royalism was secretly predominant. Du Bousquier, exasperated against Bonaparte, with his tales of the First Consul’s pettiness, of Joséphine’s lax morals, and a whole store of anecdotes of ten years of Revolution, seen from within, met with a good reception.</p>
			<p>It was about this period of his life that du Bousquier, now well over his fortieth year, came out as a bachelor of thirty-six. He was of medium height, fat as became a contractor, and willing to display a pair of calves that would have done credit to a gay and gallant attorney. He had strongly marked features; a flattened nose with tufts of hair in the equine nostrils, bushy black brows, and eyes beneath them that looked out shrewd as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Talleyrand’s own, though they had lost something of their brightness. He wore his brown hair very long, and retained the side-whiskers (<i xml:lang="fr">nageoires</i>, as they were called) of the time of the Republic. You had only to look at his fingers, tufted at every joint, or at the blue knotted veins that stood out upon his hands, to see the unmistakable signs of a very remarkable muscular development; and, in truth, he had the chest of the Farnese Hercules, and shoulders fit to bear the burden of the national debt; you never see such shoulders nowadays. His was a luxuriant virility admirably described by an eighteenth century phrase which is scarcely intelligible today; the gallantry of a bygone age would have summed up du Bousquier as a “payer of arrears”⁠—<i xml:lang="fr">un vrai payeur d’arrérages</i>.</p>
			<p>Yet, as in the case of the Chevalier de Valois, there were sundry indications at variance with the ex-contractor’s general appearance. His vocal powers, for instance, were not in keeping with his muscles; not that it was the mere thread of a voice which sometimes issues from the throats of such two-footed seals; on the contrary, it was loud but husky, something like the sound of a saw cutting through damp, soft wood; it was, in fact, the voice of a speculator brought to grief. For a long while du Bousquier wore the costume in vogue in the days of his glory: the boots with turned-down tops, the while silk stockings, the short cloth breeches, ribbed with cinnamon color, the blue coat, the waistcoat à la Robespierre.</p>
			<p>His hatred of the First Consul should have been a sort of passport into the best Royalist houses of Alençon; but the seven or eight families that made up the local Faubourg Saint-Germain into which the Chevalier de Valois had the entrance, held aloof. Almost from the first, du Bousquier had aspired to marry one <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande, whose brother was one of the most esteemed nobles of the town; he thought to make this brother play a great part in his own schemes, for he was dreaming of a brilliant return match in politics. He met with a refusal, for which he consoled himself with such compensation as he might find among some half-score of retired manufacturers of <i xml:lang="fr">Point d’Alençon</i>, owners of grass lands or cattle, or wholesale linen merchants, thinking that among these chance might put a good match in his way. Indeed, the old bachelor had centered all his hopes on a prospective fortunate marriage, which a man, eligible in so many ways, might fairly expect to make. For he was not without a, certain financial acumen, of which not a few availed themselves. He pointed out business speculations as a ruined gambler gives hints to new hands; and he was expert at discovering the resources, chances, and management of a concern. People looked upon him as a good administrator. It was an often-discussed question whether he should not be mayor of Alençon, but the recollection of his Republican jobberies spoiled his chances, and he was never received at the prefecture.</p>
			<p>Every successive government, even the government of the Hundred Days, declined to give him the coveted appointment, which would have assured his marriage with an elderly spinster whom he now had in his mind. It was his detestation of the Imperial Government that drove him into the Royalist camp, where he stayed in spite of insults there received; but when the Bourbons returned, and still he was excluded from the prefecture, that final rebuff filled him with a hatred deep as the profound secrecy in which he wrapped it. Outwardly, he remained patiently faithful to his opinions; secretly, he became the leader of the Liberal party in Alençon, the invisible controller of elections; and, by his cunningly devised manoeuvres and underhand methods, he worked no little harm to the restored Monarchy.</p>
			<p>When a man is reduced to live through his intellect alone, his hatred is something as quiet as a little stream; insignificant to all appearance, but unfailing. This was the ease with du Bousquier. His hatred was like a negro’s, so placid, so patient, that it deceives the enemy. For fifteen years he brooded over a revenge which no victory, not even the Three Days of July 1830, could sat.</p>
			<p>When the Chevalier sent Suzanne to du Bousquier, he and his own reasons for so doing. The Liberal and the Royalist divined each other, in spite of the skilful dissimulation which hid their common aim from the rest of the town.</p>
			<p>The two old bachelors were rivals. Both of them had planned to marry the Demoiselle Cormon, whose name came up in the course of the Chevalier’s conversation with Suzanne. Both of them, engrossed by their idea, and masquerading in indifference, were waiting for the moment when some chance should deliver the old maid to one or other of them. And the fact that they were rivals in this way would have been enough to make enemies of the pair even if each had not been the living embodiment of a political system.</p>
			<p>Men take their color from their time. This pair of rivals is a case in point; the historic tinge of their characters stood out in strong contrast in their talk, their ideas, their costume. The one, blunt and energetic, with his burly abrupt ways, curt speech, dark looks, dark hair, and dark complexion, alarming in appearance, but impotent in reality as insurrection, was the Republic personified; the other, bland and polished, elegant and fastidious, gaining his ends slowly but surely by diplomacy, and never unmindful of good taste, was the typical old-world courtier. They met on the same ground almost every evening. It was a rivalry always courteous and urbane on the part of the Chevalier, less ceremonious on du Bousquier’s, though he kept within the limits prescribed by Alençon, for he had no wish to be driven ignominiously from the field. The two men understood each other well; but no one else saw what was going on. In spite of the minute and curious Interest which provincials take in the small details of which their lives are made up, no one so much as suspected that the two men were rivals.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Chevalier’s position was somewhat the stronger; he had never proposed for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, whereas du Bousquier had declared himself after a rebuff from one of the noblest families, and had met with a second refusal. Still, the Chevalier thought so well of his rival’s chances, that, he considered it worth while to deal him a <i xml:lang="fr">coup de Jarnac</i>, a treacherous thrust from a weapon as finely tempered as Suzanne. He had fathomed du Bousquier; and, as will shortly be seen, he was not mistaken in any of his conjectures.</p>
			<p>Suzanne tripped away down the Rue du Cours, along the Rue de la Porte de Séez and the Rue du Bercail to the Rue du Cygne, where du Bousquier, five years ago, had bought a small countrified house built of the gray stone of the district, which is used like granite in Normandy, or Breton schist in the West. The sometime forage-contractor had established himself there in more comfort than any other house in the town could boast, for he had brought with him some relics of past days of splendor; but provincial manners and customs were slowly darkening the glory of the fallen Sardanapalus. The vestiges of past luxury looked about as much out of place in the house as a chandelier in a barn. Harmony, which links the works of man or of God together, was lacking in all things large or small. A ewer with a metal lid, such as you only see on the outskirts of Brittany, stood on a handsome chest of drawers; and while the bedroom floor was covered with a fine carpet, the window-curtains displayed a flower pattern only known to cheap printed cottons. The stone mantelpiece, daubed over with paint, was out of all keeping with a handsome clock disgraced by a shabby pair of candlesticks. Local talent had made an unsuccessful attempt to paint the doors in vivid contrasts of startling colors; while the staircase, ascended by all and sundry in muddy boots, had not been painted at all. In short, du Bousquier’s house, like the time which he represented, was a confused mixture of grandeur and squalor.</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier was regarded as well-to-do, but he led the parasitical life of the Chevalier de Valois, and he is always rich enough that spends less than his income. His one servant was a country bumpkin, a dull-witted youth enough; but he had been trained, by slow degrees, to suit du Bousquier’s requirements, until he had learned, much as an orangutan might learn, to scour floors, black boots, brush clothes, and to come for his master of an evening with a lantern if it was dark, and a pair of sabots if it rained. On great occasions, du Bousquier made him discard the blue-checked cotton blouse with loose sagging pockets behind, which always bulged with a handkerchief, a clasp knife, apples, or “stickjaw.” Arrayed in a regulation suit of clothes, he accompanied his master to wait at table, and over-ate himself afterwards with the other servants. Like many other mortals, René had only stuff enough in him for one vice, and his was gluttony. Du Bousquier made a reward of this service, and in return his Breton factotum was absolutely discreet.</p>
			<p>“What, have you come our way, miss?” René asked when he saw Suzanne in the doorway. “It is not your day; we have not got any linen for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Lardot.”</p>
			<p>“Big stupid!” laughed the fair Suzanne, as she went up the stairs, leaving René to finish a porringer full of buckwheat bannocks boiled in milk.</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier was still in bed, ruminating his plans for fortune. To him, as to all who have squeezed the orange of pleasure, there was nothing left but ambition. Ambition, like gambling, is inexhaustible. And, moreover, given a good constitution, the passions of the brain will always outlive the heart’s passions.</p>
			<p>“Here I am!” said Suzanne, sitting down on the bed; the curtain-rings grated along the rods as she swept them sharply back with an imperious gesture.</p>
			<p>“<i xml:lang="fr">Quésaco</i>, my charmer?” asked du Bousquier, sitting upright.</p>
			<p>“Monsieur,” Suzanne began, with much gravity, “you must be surprised to see me come in this way; but, under the circumstances, it is no use my minding what people will say.”</p>
			<p>“What is all this about?” asked du Bousquier, folding his arms.</p>
			<p>“Why, do you not understand?” returned Suzanne. “I know” (with an engaging little pout), “I know how ridiculous it is when a poor girl comes to bother a man about things that you think mere trifles. But if you really know me, monsieur, if you only knew all that I would do for a man, if he cared about me as I could care about you, you would never repent of marrying me. It is not that I could be of so much use to you <em>here</em>, by the way; but if we went to Paris, you should see how far I could bring a man of spirit with such brains as yours, and especially just now, when they are remaking the Government from top to bottom, and the foreigners are the masters. Between ourselves, does this thing in question really matter after all? Is it not a piece of good fortune for which you would be glad to pay a good deal one of these days? For whom are you going to think and work?”</p>
			<p>“For myself, to be sure!” du Bousquier answered brutally.</p>
			<p>“Old monster! you shall never be a father!” said Suzanne, with a ring in her voice which turned the words to a prophecy and a curse.</p>
			<p>“Come, Suzanne, no nonsense; I am dreaming still, I think.”</p>
			<p>“What more do you want in the way of reality?” cried Suzanne, rising to her feet. Du Bousquier scrubbed his head with his cotton nightcap, which he twisted round and round with a fidgety energy that told plainly of prodigious mental ferment.</p>
			<p>“He actually believes it!” Suzanne said within herself. “And his vanity is tickled. Good Lord, how easy it is to take them in!”</p>
			<p>“Suzanne! What the deuce do you want me to do? It is so extraordinary⁠ ⁠… I that thought⁠—The fact is.⁠ ⁠… But no, no, it can’t be⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Do you mean that you cannot marry me?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, as to that, no. I am not free.”</p>
			<p>“Is it <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, who have both refused you already? Look here, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier, it is not as if I was obliged to get gendarmes to drag you to the registrar’s office to save my character. There are plenty that would marry me, but I have no intention whatever of taking a man that does not know my value. You may be sorry some of these days that you behaved like this; for if you will not take your chance today, not for gold, nor silver, nor anything in this world will I give it you again.”</p>
			<p>“But, Suzanne⁠—are you sure?”</p>
			<p>“Sir, for what do you take me?” asked the girl, draping herself in her virtue. “I am not going to put you in mind of the promises you made, promises that have been the ruin of a poor girl, when all her fault was that she looked too high and loved too much.”</p>
			<p>But joy, suspicion, self-interest, and a host of contending emotions had taken possession of du Bousquier. For a long time past he had made up his mind that he would marry <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon; for after long ruminations over the Charter, he saw that it opened up magnificent prospects to his ambition through the channels of a representative government. His marriage with that mature spinster would raise his social position very much; he would acquire great influence in Alençon. And here this wily Suzanne had conjured up a storm, which put him in a most awkward dilemma. But for that private hope of his, he would have married Suzanne out of hand, and put himself openly at the head of the Liberal party in the town. Such a marriage meant the final renunciation of the best society, and a drop into the ranks of the wealthy tradesmen, shopkeepers, rich manufacturers, and graziers who, beyond a doubt, would carry him as their candidate in triumph. Already du Bousquier caught a glimpse of the Opposition benches. He did not attempt to hide his solemn deliberations; he rubbed his hand over his head, made a wisp of the cotton nightcap, and a damaging confession of the nudity beneath it. As for Suzanne, after the wont of those who succeed beyond their utmost hopes, she sat dumbfounded. To hide her amazement at his behavior, she drooped like a hapless victim before her seducer, while within herself she laughed like a grisette on a frolic.</p>
			<p>“My dear child, I will have nothing to do with hanky-panky of this sort.”</p>
			<p>This brief formula was the result of his cogitations. The ex-contractor to the Government prided himself upon belonging to that particular school of cynic philosophers which declines to be “taken in” by women, and includes the whole sex in one category as suspicious characters. Strong-minded men of this stamp, weaklings are they for the most part, have a catechism of their own in the matter of womankind. Every woman, according to them, from the Queen of France to the milliner, is at heart a rake, a hussy, a dangerous creature, not to say a bit of a rascal, a liar in grain, a being incapable of a serious thought. For du Bousquier and his like, woman is a maleficent bayadère that must be left to dance, and sing, and laugh. They see nothing holy, nothing great in woman; for them she represents, not the poetry of the senses, but gross sensuality. They are like gluttons who should mistake the kitchen for the dining-room. On this showing, a man must be a consistent tyrant, unless he means to be enslaved. And in this respect, again, du Bousquier and the Chevalier de Valois stood at opposite poles.</p>
			<p>As he delivered himself of the above remark, he flung his nightcap to the foot of the bed, much as Gregory the Great might have flung down the candle while he launched the thunders of an excommunication; and Suzanne learned that the old bachelor wore a false front.</p>
			<p>“Bear in mind, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier, that by coming here I have done my duty,” she remarked majestically. “Remember that I was bound to offer you my hand and to ask for yours; but, at the same time, remember that I have behaved with the dignity of a self-respecting woman; I did not lower myself so far as to cry like a fool; I did not insist; I have not worried you at all. Now you know my position. You know that I cannot stay in Alençon. If I do, my mother will beat me; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Lardot is as high and mighty over principles as if she washed and ironed with them. She will turn me away. And where am I to go, poor workgirl that I am? To the hospital? Am I to beg for bread? Not I. I would sooner fling myself into the Brillante or the Sarthe. Now, would it not be simpler for me to go to Paris? Mother might find some excuse for sending me, an uncle wants me to come, or an aunt is going to die, or some lady takes an interest in me. It is just a question of money for the traveling expenses and⁠—you know what⁠—”</p>
			<p>This news was immeasurably more important to du Bousquier than to the Chevalier de Valois, for reasons which no one knew as yet but the two rivals, though they will appear in the course of the story. At this point, suffice it to say that Suzanne’s fib had thrown the sometime forage-contractor’s ideas into such confusion that he was incapable of thinking seriously. But for that bewilderment, but for the secret joy in his heart (for a man’s own vanity is a swindler that never lacks a dupe), it must have struck him that any honest girl, with, a heart still unspoiled, would have died a hundred deaths rather than enter upon such a discussion, or make a demand for money. He must have seen the look in the girl’s eyes, seen the gambler’s ruthless meanness that would take a life to gain money for a stake.</p>
			<p>“Would you really go to Paris?” he asked.</p>
			<p>The words brought a twinkle to Suzanne’s gray eyes, but it was lost upon du Bousquier’s self-satisfaction.</p>
			<p>“I would indeed, sir.”</p>
			<p>But at this du Bousquier broke out into a singular lament. He had just paid the balance of the purchase-money for his house; and there was the painter, and the glazier, and the bricklayer, and the carpenter. Suzanne let him talk; she was waiting for the figures. Du Bousquier at last proposed three hundred francs, and at this Suzanne got up as if to go.</p>
			<p>“Eh, what! Where are you going?” du Bousquier cried uneasily.⁠—“A fine thing to be a bachelor,” he said to himself. “I’ll be hanged if I remember doing more than rumple the girl’s collar; and hey presto! on the strength of a joke she takes upon herself to draw a bill upon you, point-blank!”</p>
			<p>Suzanne meanwhile began to cry. “Monsieur,” she said, “I am going to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, the treasurer of the Maternity Fund; she pulled one poor girl in the same straits out of the water (as you may say) to my knowledge.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson?”</p>
			<p>“Yes. She is related to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, the lady patroness of the society. Asking your pardon, some ladies in the town have started a society that will keep many a poor creature from making away with her child, like that pretty Faustine of Argentan did; and paid for it with her life at Mortagne just three years ago.”</p>
			<p>“Here, Suzanne,” returned du Bousquier, holding out a key, “open the desk yourself. There is a bag that has been opened, with six hundred francs still left in it. It is all I have.”</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier’s chopfallen expression plainly showed how little goodwill went with his compliance.</p>
			<p>“An old thief!” said Suzanne to herself. “I will tell tales about his false hair!” Mentally she compared him with that delightful old Chevalier de Valois; he had given her nothing, but he understood her, he had advised her, he had the welfare of his grisettes at heart.</p>
			<p>“If you are deceiving me, Suzanne,” exclaimed the object of this unflattering comparison, as he watched her hand in the drawer, “you shall⁠—”</p>
			<p>“So, monsieur, you would not give me the money if I asked you for it?” interrupted she with queenly insolence.</p>
			<p>Once recalled to the ground of gallantry, recollections of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Ms.</abbr> prime came back to the ex-contractor. He grunted assent. Suzanne took the bag and departed, first submitting her forehead to a kiss which he gave, but in a manner which seemed to say, “This is an expensive privilege; but it is better than being browbeaten by counsel in a court of law as the seducer of a young woman accused of child murder.”</p>
			<p>Suzanne slipped the bag into a pouch-shaped basket on her arm, execrating du Bousquier’s stinginess as she did so, for she wanted a thousand francs. If a girl is once possessed by a desire, and has taken the first step in trickery and deceit, she will go to great lengths. As the fair clear-starcher took her way along the Rue du Bercail, it suddenly occurred to her that the Maternity Fund under <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s presidency would probably make up the sum which she regarded as sufficient for a start, a very large amount in the eyes of an Alençon grisette. And besides, she hated du Bousquier, and du Bousquier seemed frightened when she talked of confessing her so-called strait to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson. Wherefore Suzanne determined that whether or no she made a farthing out of the Maternity Fund, she would entangle du Bousquier in the inextricable undergrowth of the gossip of a country town. There is something of a monkey’s love of mischief in every grisette. Suzanne composed her countenance dolorously and betook herself accordingly to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson was the widow of a lieutenant-colonel of artillery who fell at Jena. Her whole yearly income consisted of a pension of nine hundred francs for her lifetime, and her one possession besides was a son whose education and maintenance had absorbed every penny of her savings. She lived in the Rue du Bercail, in one of the cheerless ground-floor apartments through which you can see from back to front at a glance as you walk down the main street of any little town. Three steps, rising pyramid fashion, brought you to the level of the house door, which opened upon a passageway and a little yard beyond, with a wooden-roofed staircase at the further end. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson’s kitchen and dining-room occupied the space on one side of the passage, on the other side a single room did duty for a variety of purposes, for the widow’s bedroom among others. Her son, a young man of three-and-twenty, slept upstairs in an attic above the first floor. Athanase Granson contributed six hundred francs to the poor mother’s housekeeping. He was distantly related to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, whose influence had obtained him a little post in the registrar’s office, where he was employed in making out certificates of births, marriages, and deaths.</p>
			<p>After this, anyone can see the little chilly yellow-curtained parlor, the furniture covered with yellow Utrecht velvet, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson going round the room, after her visitors had left, to straighten the little straw mats put down in front of each chair, so as to save the waxed and polished red brick floor from contact with dirty boots; and, this being accomplished, returning to her place beside her worktable under the portrait of her lieutenant-general. The becushioned armchair, in which she sat at her sewing, was always drawn up between the two windows, so that she could look up and down the Rue du Bercail and see everyone that passed. She was a good sort of woman, dressed with a homely simplicity in keeping with a pale face, beaten thin, as it were, by many cares. You felt the stern soberness of poverty in every little detail in that house, just as you breathed a moral atmosphere of austerity and upright provincial ways.</p>
			<p>Mother and son at this moment were sitting together in the dining-room over their breakfast⁠—a cup of coffee, bread and butter and radishes. And here, if the reader is to understand how gladly <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson heard Suzanne, some explanation of the secret hopes of the household must be given.</p>
			<p>Athanase Granson was a thin, hollow-cheeked young man of medium height, with a white face in which a pair of dark eyes, bright with thought, looked like two marks made with charcoal. The somewhat worn contours of that face, the curving line of the lips, a sharply turned-up chin, a regularly cut marble forehead, a melancholy expression caused by the consciousness of power on the one hand and of poverty on the other⁠—all these signs and characteristics told of imprisoned genius. So much so indeed, that anywhere but at Alençon his face would have won help for him from distinguished men, or from the women that can discern genius incognito. For if this was not genius, at least it was the outward form that genius takes; and if the strength of a high heart was wanting, it looked out surely from those eyes. And yet, while Athanase could find expression for the loftiest feeling, an outer husk of shyness spoiled everything in him, down to the very charm of youth, just as the frost of penury disheartened every effort. Shut in by the narrow circle of provincial life, without approbation, encouragement, or any way of escape, the thought within him was dying out before its dawn. And Athanase besides had the fierce pride which poverty intensifies in certain natures, the kind of pride by which a man grows great in the stress of battle with men and circumstances, while at the outset it only handicaps him.</p>
			<p>Genius manifests itself in two ways⁠—either by taking its own as soon as he finds it, like a Napoleon or a Molière, or by patiently revealing itself and waiting for recognition. Young Granson belonged to the latter class. He was easily discouraged, ignorant of his value. His turn of mind was contemplative, he lived in thought rather than in action, and possibly, to those who cannot imagine genius without the Frenchman’s spark of enthusiasm, he might have seemed incomplete. But Athanase’s power lay in the world of thought. He was to pass through successive phases of emotion, hidden from ordinary eyes, to one of those sudden resolves which bring the chapter to a close and set fools declaring that “the man is mad.” The world’s contempt for poverty was sapping the life in Athanase. The bow, continually strung tighter and tighter, was slackened by the enervating close air of a solitude with never a breath of fresh air in it. He was giving way under the strain of a cruel and fruitless struggle. Athanase had that in him which might have placed his name among the foremost names of France; he had known what it was to gaze with glowing eyes over Alpine heights and fields of air whither unfettered genius soars, and now he was pining to death like some caged and starved eagle.</p>
			<p>While he had worked on unnoticed in the town library, he barred his dreams of fame in his own soul lest they should injure his prospects; and he carried besides another secret hidden even more deeply in his heart, the secret love which hollowed his cheeks and sallowed his forehead.</p>
			<p>Athanase loved his distant cousin, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, for whom his unconscious rivals du Bousquier and the Chevalier de Valois were lying in ambush. It was a love born of self-interest. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was supposed to be one of the richest people in the town; and he, poor boy, had been drawn to love her partly through the desire for material welfare, partly through a wish formed times without number to gild his mother’s declining years; and partly also through cravings for the physical comfort necessary to men who live an intellectual life. In his own eyes. Ins love was dishonored by its very natural origin; and he was afraid of the ridicule which people pour on the love of a young man of three-and-twenty for a woman of forty. And yet his love was quite sincere. Much that happens in the provinces would be improbable upon the face of it anywhere else, especially in matters of this kind.</p>
			<p>But in a country town there are no unforeseen contingencies; there is no coming and going, no mystery, no such thing as chance. Marriage is a necessity, and no family will accept a man of dissolute life. A connection between a young fellow like Athanase and a handsome girl might seem a natural thing enough in a great city; in a country town it would be enough to ruin a young man’s chances of marriage, especially if he were poor; for when the prospective bridegroom is wealthy an awkward business of this sort may be smoothed over. Between the degradation of certain courses and a sincere love, a man that is not heartless can make but one choice if he happens to be poor; he will prefer the disadvantages of virtue to the disadvantages of vice. But in a country town the number of women with whom a young man can fall in love is strictly limited. A pretty girl with a fortune is beyond his reach in a place where everyone’s income is known to a farthing. A penniless beauty is equally out of the question. To take her for a wife would be “to marry hunger and thirst,” as the provincial saying goes. Finally, celibacy has its dangers in youth. These reflections explain how it has come to pass that marriage is the very basis of provincial life.</p>
			<p>Men in whom genius is hot and unquenchable, who are forced to take their stand on the independence of poverty ought to leave these cold regions; in the provinces thought meets with the persecution of brutal indifference, and no woman cares or dares to play the part of a sister of charity to the worker, the lover of art or sciences.</p>
			<p>Who can rightly understand Athanase’s love for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Gormen? Not the rich, the sultans of society, who can find seraglios at their pleasure; not respectability, keeping to the track beaten hard by prejudice; nor yet those women who shut their eyes to the cravings of the artist temperament, and, taking it for granted that both sexes are governed by the same laws, insist upon a system of reciprocity in their particular virtues. The appeal must, perhaps, be made to young men who suffer from the repression of young desires just as they are putting forth their full strength; to the artist whose genius is stilled within him by poverty till it becomes a disease; to power at first unsupported, persecuted, and too often unfriended till it emerges at length triumphant from the twofold agony of soul and body.</p>
			<p>These will know the throbbing pangs of the cancer which was gnawing Athanase. Such as these have raised long, cruel debates within themselves, with the so high end in sight and no means of attaining to it. They have passed through the experience of abortive effort; they have left the spawn of genius on the barren sands. They know that the strength of desire is as the scope of the imagination; the higher the leap, the lower the fall; and how many restraints are broken in such falls! These, like Athanase, catch glimpses of a glorious future in the distance; all that lies between seems but a transparent film of gauze to their piercing sight; but of that film which scarcely obscures the vision, society makes a wall of brass. Urged on by their vocation, by the artist’s instinct within them, they too seek times without number to make a stepping-stone of sentiments which society turns in the same way to practical ends. What! when marriages in the provinces are calculated and arranged on every side with a view to securing material welfare, shall it be forbidden to a struggling artist or man of science to keep two ends in view, to try to ensure his own subsistence that the thought within him may live?</p>
			<p>Athanase Granson, with such ideas as these fermenting in his head, thought at first of marriage with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon as a definite solution of the problem of existence. He would be free to work for fame, he could make his mother comfortable, and he felt sure of himself⁠—he knew that he could be faithful to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon. But soon his purpose bred a real passion in him. It was an unconscious process. He set himself to study <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon; then familiarity exercised its spell, and at length Athanase saw nothing but beauties⁠—the defects were all forgotten.</p>
			<p>The senses count for so much in the love of a young man of three-and-twenty. Through the heat of desire woman is seen as through a prism. From this point of view it was a touch of genius in Beaumarchais to make the page Cherubino in the play strain Marcellina to his heart. If you recollect, moreover, that poverty restricted Athanase to a life of great loneliness, that there was no other woman to look at, that his eyes were always fastened upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, and that all the light in the picture was concentrated upon her, it seems natural, does it not, that he should love her? The feeling hidden in the depths of his heart could but grow stronger day by day. Desire and pain and hope and meditation, in silence and repose, were filling up Athanase’s soul to the brim; every hour added its drop. As his senses came to the aid of imagination and widened the inner horizon. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon became more and more awe-inspiring, and he grew more and more timid.</p>
			<p>The mother had guessed it all. She was a provincial, and she frankly calculated the advantages of the match. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon might think herself very lucky to marry a young man of twenty-three with plenty of brains, a likely man to do honor to his name and country. Still the obstacles, Athanase’s poverty and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s age, seemed to her to be insurmountable; there was nothing for it that she could see but patience. She had a policy of her own, like du Bousquier and the Chevalier de Valois; she was on the lookout for her opportunity, waiting, with wits sharpened by self-interest and a mother’s love, for the propitious moment.</p>
			<p>Of the Chevalier de Valois, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson had no suspicion whatsoever; du Bousquier she still credited with views upon the lady, albeit <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon had once refused him. An adroit and secret enemy. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Granson did the ex-contractor untold harm to serve the son to whom she had not spoken a word. After this, who does not see the importance of Suzanne’s lie once confided to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson? What a weapon put into the hands of the charitable treasurer of the Maternity-Fund! How demurely she would carry the tale from house to house when she asked for subscriptions for the chaste Suzanne!</p>
			<p>At this particular moment Athanase was pensively sitting with his elbow on the table, balancing a spoon on the edge of the empty bowl before him. He looked with unseeing eyes round the poor room, over the walls covered with an old-fashioned paper only seen in wine-shops, at the window-curtains with a chessboard pattern of pink-and-white squares, at the redbrick floor, the straw-bottomed chairs, the painted wooden sideboard, the glass door that opened into the kitchen. As he sat facing his mother and with his back to the fire, and as the fireplace was almost opposite the door, the first thing which caught Suzanne’s eyes was his pale face, with the light ‘ from the street window falling full upon it, a face framed in dark hair, and eyes with the gleam of despair in them, and a fever kindled by the morning’s thoughts.</p>
			<p>The grisette surety knows by instinct the pain and sorrow of love; at the sight of Athanase, she felt that sudden electric thrill which comes we know not whence. We cannot explain it; some strong-minded persons deny that it exists, but many a woman and many a man has felt that shock of sympathy. It is a flash, lighting up the darkness of the future, and at the same time a presentiment of the pure joy of love shared by two souls, and a certainty that this other too understands. It is more like the strong, sure touch of a master hand upon the clavier of the senses than anything else. Eyes are riveted by an irresistible fascination, hearts are troubled, the music of joy rings in the ears and thrills the soul; a voice cries, “It is he!” And then⁠—then very likely, reflection throws a douche of cold water over all this turbulent emotion, and there is an end of it.</p>
			<p>In a moment, swift as a clap of thunder, a broadside of new thoughts poured in upon Suzanne. A lightning flash of love burned the weeds which had sprung up in dissipation and wantonness. She saw all that she was losing by blighting her name with a lie, the desecration, the degradation of it. Only last evening this idea had been a joke, now it was like a heavy sentence passed upon her. She recoiled before her success. But, after all, it was quite impossible that anything should come of this meeting; and the thought of Athanase’s poverty, and a vague hope of making money and coming back from Paris with both hands full, to say, “I loved you all along”⁠—or fate, if you will have it so⁠—dried up the beneficent dew. The ambitious damsel asked shyly to speak for a moment with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, who took her into her bedroom.</p>
			<p>When Suzanne came out again she looked once more at Athanase. He was still sitting in the same attitude. She choked back her tears.</p>
			<p>As for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, she was radiant. She had found a terrible weapon to use against du Bousquier at last; she could deal him a deadly blow. So she promised the poor victim of seduction the support of all the ladies who subscribed to the Maternity Fund. She foresaw a dozen calls in prospect. In the course of the morning and afternoon she would conjure down a terrific storm upon the elderly bachelor’s head. The Chevalier de Valois certainly foresaw the turn that matters were likely to take, but he had not expected anything like the amount of scandal that came of it.</p>
			<p>“We are going to dine with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, you know, dear boy,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson; “take rather more pains with your appearance. It is a mistake to neglect your dress as you do; you look so untidy. Put on your best frilled shirt and your green cloth coat. I have my reasons,” she added, with a mysterious air. “And besides, there will be a great many people; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon is going to the Prébaudet directly. If a young man is thinking of marrying, he ought to make himself agreeable in every possible way. If girls would only tell the truth, my boy, dear me! you would be surprised at the things that take their fancy. It is often quite enough if a young man rides by at the head of a company of artillery, or comes to a dance in a suit of clothes that fits him passably well. A certain way of carrying the head, a melancholy attitude, is enough to set a girl imagining a whole life; we invent a romance to suit the hero; often he is only a stupid young man, but the marriage is made. Take notice of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois, study him, copy his manners; see how he looks at ease; he has not a constrained manner, as you have. And talk a little; anyone might think that you knew nothing at all, <em>you</em> that know Hebrew by heart.”</p>
			<p>Athanase heard her submissively, but he looked surprised. He rose, took his cap, and went back to his work.</p>
			<p>“Can mother have guessed my secret?” he thought, as he went round by the Rue du Val-Noble where <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon lived, a little pleasure in which he indulged of a morning. His head was swarming with romantic fancies.</p>
			<p>“How little she thinks that going past her house at this moment is a young man who would love her dearly, and be true to her, and never cause her a single care, and leave her fortune entirely in her own hands! Oh me! what a strange fatality it is that we two should live as we do in the same town and within a few paces of each other, and yet nothing can bring us any nearer! How if I spoke to her tonight?”</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Suzanne went home to her mother, thinking the while of poor Athanase, feeling that for him she could find it in her heart to do what many a woman must have longed to do for the one beloved with superhuman strength; she could have made a stepping-stone of her beautiful body if so he might come to his kingdom the sooner.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>And now we must enter the house where all the actors in this Scene (Suzanne excepted) were to meet that very evening, the house belonging to the old maid, the converging point of so many interests. As for Suzanne, that young woman with her well-grown beauty, with courage sufficient to burn her boats, like Alexander, and to begin the battle of life with an uncalled-for sacrifice of her character, she now disappears from the stage after bringing about a violently exciting situation. Her wishes, moreover, were more than fulfilled. A few days afterwards she left her native place with a stock of money and fine clothes, including a superb green rep gown and a green bonnet lined with rose color, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois’ gifts, which Suzanne liked better than anything else, better even than the Maternity Society’s money. If the Chevalier had gone to Paris while Suzanne was in her heyday, she would assuredly have left all for him.</p>
			<p>And so this chaste Susanna, of whom the elders scarcely had more than a glimpse, settled herself comfortably and hopefully in Paris, while all Alençon was deploring the mis’ fortunes with which the ladies of the Charitable and Maternity Societies had manifested so lively a sympathy.</p>
			<p>While Suzanne might be taken as a type of the handsome Norman virgins who furnish, on the showing of a learned physician, one-third of the supply devoured by the mouster, Paris, she entered herself, and remained in those higher branches of her profession in which some regard is paid to appearances. In an age in which, as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois said, “woman has ceased to be woman,” she was known merely as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Val-Noble; in “other times she would have rivaled an Imperia, a Rhodope, a Ninon. One of the most distinguished writers of the Restoration took her under his protection, and very likely will marry her some day; he is a journalist, and above public opinion, seeing that he creates a new one every six years.</p>
			<p>In almost every prefecture of the second magnitude there is some salon frequented not exactly by the cream of the local society, but by personages both considerable and well considered. The host and hostess probably will be among the foremost people in the town. To them all houses are open; no entertainment, no public dinner is given, but they are asked to it; but in their salon you will not meet the getis a château⁠—lords of the manor, peers of France living on their broad acres, and persons of the highest quality in the department, though these are all on visiting terms with the family, and exchange invitations to dinners and evening parties. The mixed society to be found there usually consists of the lesser noblesse resident in the town, with the clergy and judicial authorities. It is an influential assemblage. All the wit and sense of the district is concentrated in its solid, unpretentious ranks. Everybody in the set knows the exact amount of hi; neighbor’s income, and professes the utmost indifference to dress and luxury, trifles held to be mere childish vanity compared with the acquisition of a <i xml:lang="fr">mouchoir a boeufs</i>⁠—a pocket-handkerchief of some ten or a dozen acres, purchased after as many years of pondering and intriguing and a prodigious deal of diplomacy.</p>
			<p>Unshaken in its prejudices whether good or ill, the coterie goes on its way without a look before or behind. Nothing from Paris is allowed to pass without a prolonged scrutiny; innovations are ridiculous, and consols and cashmere shawls alike objectionable. Provincials read nothing and wish to learn nothing; for them, science, literature, and mechanical invention are as the thing that is not. If a prefect does not suit their notions, they do their best to have him removed; if this cannot be done, they isolate him. So will you see the inmates of a beehive wall up an intruding snail with wax. Finally, of the gossip of the salon, history is made. Young married women put in an appearance there occasionally (though the card-table is the one resource) that their conduct may be stamped with the approval of the coterie and their social status confirmed.</p>
			<p>Native susceptibilities are sometimes wounded by the supremacy of a single house, but the rest comfort themselves with the thought that they save the expense entailed by the position. Sometimes it happens that no one can afford to keep open house, and then the bigwigs of the place look about them for some harmless person whose character, position, and social standing offer guarantees for the neutrality of the ground, and alarm nobody’s vanity or self-interest. This had been the ease at Alençon. For a long time past the best society of the town has been wont to assemble in the house of the old maid before mentioned, who little suspected <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson’s designs on her fortune, or the secret hopes of the two elderly bachelors who have just been unmasked.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson’s fourth cousin. She lived with her mother’s brother, a sometime vicar-general of the bishopric of Séez; she had been her uncle’s ward, and would one day inherit his fortune. Rose Marie Victoire Cormon was the last representative of a house which, plebeian though it was, had associated and often allied itself with the noblesse, and ranked among the oldest families in the province. In former times the Cormons had been intendants of the duchy of Alençon, and had given a goodly number of magistrates to the bench, and several bishops to the Church. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Sponde, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s maternal grandfather, was elected by the noblesse to the States-General; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Cormon, her father, had been asked to represent the Third Estate, but neither of them accepted the responsibility. For the last century, the daughters of the house had married into the noble families of the province, in such sort that the Cormons were grafted into pretty nearly every genealogical tree in the duchy. No burgher family came so near being noble.</p>
			<p>The house in which the present <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon lived had never passed out of the family since it was built by Pierre Cormon in the reign of Henri <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>; and of all the old maid’s worldly possessions, this one appealed most to the greed of her elderly suitors; though, so far from bringing in money, the ancestral home of the Cormons was a positive expense to its owner. But it is such an unusual thing, in the very centre of a country town, to find a house handsome without, convenient within, and free from mean surroundings, that all Alençon shared the feeling of envy.</p>
			<p>The old mansion stood exactly halfway down the Rue du Val-Noble, <em>The Val-Noble</em>, as it was called, probably because the Brillante, the little stream which flows through the town, has hollowed out a little valley for itself in a dip of the land thereabouts. The most noticeable feature of the house was its massive architecture, of the style introduced from Italy by Marie de’ Medici; all the cornerstones and facings were cut with diamond-shaped bosses, in spite of the difficulty of working in the granite of which it is built. It was a two-storied house with a very high-pitched roof, and a row of dormer windows, each with its carved tympanum standing picturesquely enough above the lead-lined parapet with its ornamental balustrade. A grotesque gargoyle, the head of some fantastic bodyless beast, discharged the rainwater through its jaws into the street below, where great stone slabs, pierced with five holes, were placed to receive it. Each gable terminated in a leaden finial, a sign that this was a burgher’s house, for none but nobles had a right to put up a weathercock in olden times. To right and left of the yard stood the stables and the coach-house; the kitchen, laundry, and woodshed. One of the leaves of the great gate used to stand open; so that passersby, looking in through the little low wicket with the bell attached, could see the parterre in the middle of a spacious paved court, and the low-clipped privet hedges which marked out miniature borders full of monthly roses, clove gilliflowers, scabious, and lilies, and Spanish broom; as well as the laurel bushes and pomegranates and myrtles which grew in tubs put out of doors for the summer.</p>
			<p>The scrupulous neatness and tidiness of the place must have struck any stranger, and furnished him with a clue to the old maid’s character. The mistress’ eyes must have been unemployed, careful, and prying; less, perhaps, from any natural bent, than for want of any occupation. Who but an elderly spinster, at a loss how to fill an always empty day, would have insisted that no blade of grass should show itself in the paved courtyard, that the wall-tops should be scoured, that the broom should always be busy, that the coach should never be left with the leather curtains undrawn? Who else, from sheer lack of other employment, could have introduced something like Dutch cleanliness into a little province between Perche, Normandy, and Brittany, where the natives make boast of their crass indifference to comfort? The Chevalier never climbed the steps without reflecting inwardly that the house was fit for a peer of France; and du Bousquier similarly considered that the Mayor of Alençon ought to live there.</p>
			<p>A glass door at the top of the flight of steps gave admittance to an antechamber lighted by a second glass door opposite, above a corresponding flight of steps leading into though garden. This part of the house, a kind of gallery floored with square red tiles, and wainscoted to elbow-height, was a hospital for invalid family portraits; one here and there had lost an eye or sustained injury to a shoulder, another stood with a hole in the place where his hat should have been, yet another had lost a leg by amputation. Here cloaks, clogs, overshoes, and umbrellas were left; everybody deposited his belongings in the antechamber on his arrival, and took them again at his departure. A long bench was set against either wall for the servants who came of an evening with their lanterns ta fetch home their masters and mistresses, and a big stove was set in the middle to mitigate the icy blasts which swept across from door to door.</p>
			<p>This gallery, then, divided the ground floor into two equal parts. The staircase rose to the left on the side nearest the courtyard, the rest of the space being taken up by the great dining-room, with its windows looking out upon the garden, and a pantry beyond, which communicated with the kitchen. To the right lay the salon, lighted by four windows, and a couple of smaller rooms beyond it, a boudoir which gave upon the garden, and a room which did duty as a study and looked into the courtyard. There was a complete suite of rooms on the first floor, beside the Abbé de Sponde’s apartments; while the attic story, in all probability roomy enough, had long since been given over to the tenancy of rats and mice. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon used to report their nocturnal exploits to the Chevalier de Valois, and marvel at the futility of all measures taken against them.</p>
			<p>The garden, about half an acre in extent, was bounded by the Brillante, so called from the mica spangles which glitter in its bed; not, however, in the Val-Noble, for the manufacturers and dyers of Alençon pour all their refuse into the shallow stream before it reaches this point; and the opposite bank, as always happens wherever a stream passes through a town, was lined with houses where various thirsty industries were carried on. Luckily, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s neighbors were all of them quiet tradesmen⁠—a baker, a fuller, and one or two cabinetmakers. Her garden, full of old-fashioned flowers, naturally ended in a terrace, by way of a quay, with a short flight of steps down to the water’s edge. Try to picture the wallflowers growing in blue-and-white glazed jars along the balustrade by the river, behold a shady walk to right and left beneath the square-clipped lime-trees, and you will have some idea of a scene full of unpretending cheerfulness and sober tranquillity; you can see the views of homely humble life along the opposite bank, the quaint houses, the trickling stream of the Brillante, the garden itself, the linden walks under the garden walls, and the venerable home built by the Cormons. How peaceful, how quiet it was! If there was no ostentation, there was nothing transitory, everything seemed to last forever there.</p>
			<p>The ground-floor rooms, therefore, were given over to social uses. Yon breathed the atmosphere of the Province, ancient, unalterable Province. The great square-shaped salon, with its four doors and four windows, was modestly wainscoted with carved panels, and painted gray. On the wall, above the single oblong mirror on the chimneypiece, the Hours, in monochrome, were ushering in the day. For this particular style of decoration, which used to infest the spaces above doors, the artist’s invention devised the eternal Seasons which meet your eyes almost anywhere in central France, till you loathe the detestable Cupids engaged in reaping, skating, sowing seeds, or flinging flowers about. Every window was overarched with a sort of baldachin with green damask curtains drawn back with cords and huge tassels. The tapestry-covered furniture, with a darn here and there at the edges of the chairs, belonged distinctly to that period of the eighteenth century when curves and contortions were in the very height of fashion; the frames were painted and varnished, the subjects in the medallions on the backs were taken from La Fontaine. Four card-tables, a table for piquet, and another for backgammon filled up the immense space. A rock crystal chandelier, shrouded in green gauze, hung suspended from the prominent crossbeam which divided the ceiling, the only plastered ceiling in the house. Two branched candle-sconces were fixed into the wall above the chimneypiece, where a couple of blue Sèvres vases stood on either side of a copper gilt clock which represented a scene taken from <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera" xml:lang="fr">Le Déserteur</i>⁠—a proof of the prodigious popularity of Sedaine’s work. It was a group of no less than eleven figures, four inches high; the Deserter emerging from jail escorted by a guard of soldiers, while a young person, swooning in the foreground, held out his reprieve. The hearth and fire-irons were of the same date and style. The more recent family portraits⁠—one or two Rigauds and three pastels by Latour⁠—adorned the wainscot panels.</p>
			<p>The study, paneled entirely in old lacquer work, red and black and gold, would have fetched fabulous sums a few years later; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was as far as possible from suspecting its value; but if she had been offered a thousand crowns for every panel, she would not have parted with a single one. It was a part of her system to alter nothing, and everywhere in the provinces the belief in ancestral hoards is very strong. The boudoir, never used, was hung with the old-fashioned chintz so much run after nowadays by amateurs of the “Pompadour style,” as it is called.</p>
			<p>The dining-room was paved with black-and-white stone; it had not been ceiled, but the joists and beams were painted. Ranged round the walls, beneath a flowered trellis, painted in fresco, stood the portentous, marble-topped sideboards, indispensable in the warfare waged in the provinces against the powers of digestion. The chairs were cane-seated and varnished, the doors of unpolished walnut wood. Everything combined admirably to complete the general effect, the old-world air of the house within and without. The provincial spirit had preserved all as it had always been; nothing was new or old, young or decrepit. You felt a sense of chilly precision everywhere.</p>
			<p>Any tourist in Brittany, Normandy, Maine, or Anjou must have seen some house more or less like this in one or other provincial town; for the Hôtel de Cormon was in its way a very pattern and model of burgher houses over a large part of France, and the better deserves a place in this chronicle because it is at once a commentary on the manners of the place and the expression of its ideas. Who does not feel, even now, how much the life within the old walls was one of peaceful routine?</p>
			<p>For such library as the house possessed you must have descended rather below the level of the Brillante. There stood a solidly clasped oak-bound collection, none the worse, nay, rather the better, for a thick coating of dust; a collection kept as carefully as a cider-growing district is wont to keep the products of the presses of Burgundy, Touraine, Gascony, and the South. Here were works full of native force, and exquisite qualities, with an added perfume of antiquity. No one will import poor wines when the cost of carriage is so heavy.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s whole circle consisted of about a hundred and fifty persons. Of these, some went into the country, some were ill, others from home on business in the department, but there was a faithful band which always came, unless <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon gave an evening party in form; so also did those persons who were bound either by their duties or old habit to live in Alençon itself. All these people were of ripe age. A few among them had traveled, but scarcely any of them had gone beyond the province, and one or two had been implicated in Chouannerie. People could begin to speak freely, of the war, now that rewards had come to the heroic defenders of the good cause. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois had been concerned in the last rising, when the Marquis de Montauran lost his life, betrayed by his mistress; and Marche-a-Terre, now peacefully driving a grazier’s trade by the banks of the Mayenne, had made a famous name for himself. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois, during the past six months, had supplied the key to several shrewd tricks played off upon Hulot, the old Republican, commander of a demi-brigade stationed at Alençon from 1798 till 1800. There was talk of Hulot yet in the countryside.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-2" id="noteref-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a></p>
			<p>The women made little pretence of dress, except on Wednesdays when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon gave a dinner party, and last week’s guests came to pay their “visit of digestion.” On Wednesday evening the rooms were filled. Guests and visitors came in gala dress; here and there a woman brought her knitting or her tapestry work, and some young ladies unblushingly drew patterns for <i xml:lang="fgr">point d’Alençon</i>, by which they supported themselves. Men brought their wives, because there was so few young fellows there; no whisper could pass unnoticed, and therefore there was no danger of lovemaking for maid or matron. Every evening at six o’clock the lobby was filled with articles of dress, with sticks, cloaks, and lanterns. Everyone was so well acquainted, the customs of the house were so primitive, that if by any chance the Abbé de Sponde was in the lime-tree walk, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon in her room, neither Josette the maid nor Jacquelin the man thought it necessary to inform them of the arrival of visitors. The first comer waited till someone else arrived; and when they mustered players sufficiently for whist or boston, the game was begun without waiting for the Abbé de Sponde or Mademoiselle. When it grew dark, Josette or Jacquelin brought lights as soon as the bell rang, and the old Abbé out in the garden, seeing the drawing-room windows illuminated, hastened slowly towards the house. Every evening the piquet, boston, and whist tables were full, giving an average of twenty-five or thirty persons, including those who came to chat; but often there were as many as thirty or forty, and then Jacquelin took candles into the study and the boudoir. Between eight and nine at night the servants began to fill the antechamber; and nothing short of a revolution would have found anyone in the salon by ten o’clock. At that hour the frequenters of the house were walking home through the streets, discussing the points made, or keeping up a conversation begun in the salon. Sometimes the talk turned on a pocket-handkerchief of land on which somebody had an eye, sometimes it was the division of an inheritance and disputes among the legatees, or the pretensions of the aristocratic set. You see exactly the same thing at Paris when the theatres disgorge.</p>
			<p>Some people who talk a great deal about poetry and understand nothing about it, are wont to rail at provincial towns and provincial ways; but lean your forehead on your left hand, as you sit with your feet on the firedogs, and rest your elbow on your knee, and then⁠—if you have fully realized for yourself the level pleasant landscape, the house, the interior, the folks within it and their interests, interests that seem all the larger because the mental horizon is so limited (as a grain of gold is beaten thin between two sheets of parchment)⁠—then ask yourself what human life is. Try to decide between the engraver of the hieroglyphic birds on an Egyptian obelisk, and one of these folk in Alençon playing boston through a score of years with du Bousquier, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, the President of the Tribunal, the Public Prosecutor, the Abbé de Sponde, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson <i xml:lang="it">e tutti quanti</i>. If the daily round, the daily pacing of the same track in the footsteps of many yesterdays, is not exactly happiness, it is so much like it that others, driven by dint of storm-tossed days to reflect on the blessings of calm, will say that it is happiness indeed.</p>
			<p>To give the exact measure of the importance of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Gormen’s salon, it will suffice to add that du Bousquier, a born statistician, computed that its frequenters mustered among them a hundred and thirty-one votes in the electoral college, and eighteen hundred thousand livres of income derived from lands in the province. The town of Alençon was not, it is true, completely represented there. The aristocratic section, for instance, had a salon of their own, and the receiver-general’s house was a sort of official inn kept, as in duty bound, by the Government, where everybody who was anybody danced, flirted, fluttered, fell in love, and supped. One or two unclassified persons kept up the communications between <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s salon and the other two, but the Cormon salon criticised all that passed in the opposed camps very severely. Sumptuous dinners gave rise to unfavorable comment; ices at a dance caused searchings of heart; the women’s behavior and dress and any innovations were much discussed.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon being, as it were, the style of the firm, and figurehead of an imposing coterie, was inevitably the object of any ambition as profound as that of the du Bousquier or the Chevalier de Valois. To both gentlemen she meant a seat in the Chamber of Deputies, with a peerage for the Chevalier, a receiver-general’s post for du Bousquier. A salon admittedly of the first rank is every whit as hard to build up in a country town as in Paris. And here was the salon ready made. To marry <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was to be lord of Alençon. Finally, Athanase, the only one of the three suitors that had ceased to calculate, cared, as much for the woman as for her money.</p>
			<p>Is there not a whole strange drama (to use the modem cant phrase) in the relative positions of these four human beings? There is something grotesque, is there not, in the idea of three rival suitors eagerly pressing about an old maid who never so much as suspected their intentions, in spite of her intense and very natural desire to be married? Yet although, things being so, it may seem an extraordinary thing that she should not have married before, it is not difficult to explain how and why, in spite of her fortune and her three suitors. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was still unwed.</p>
			<p>From the first, following the family tradition. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon had always wished to marry a noble, but between the years 1789 and 1799 circumstances were very much against her. While she would have wished to be the wife of a person of condition, she was horribly afraid of the Revolutionary Tribunal; and these two motives weighing about equally, she remained stationary, according to a law which holds equally good in aesthetics or statics. At the same time, the condition of suspended judgment is not unpleasant for a girl, so long as she feels young and thinks that she can choose where she pleases. But, as all France knows, the system of government immediately preceding the wars of Napoleon produced a vast number of widows; and the number of heiresses was altogether out of proportion to the number of eligible men. When order was restored in the country, in the time of the Consulate, external difficulties made marriage as much of a problem as ever for Rose Marie Victoire. On the one hand, she declined to marry an elderly man; and, on the other, dread of ridicule and circumstances put quite young men out of the question. In those days heads of families married their sons as mere boys, because in this way they escaped the conscription. With the obstinacy of a landed proprietor, mademoiselle would not hear of marrying a military man; she had no wish to take a husband only to give him back to the Emperor, she wished to keep him for herself. And so, between 1804 and 1815 it was impossible to compete with a younger generation of girls, too numerous already in times when cannon shot had thinned the ranks of marriageable men.</p>
			<p>Again, apart from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s predilection for birth, she had a very pardonable craze for being loved for her own sake. You would scarcely believe the lengths to which she carried this fancy. She set her wits to work to lay snares for her admirers, to try their sentiments; and that with such success, that the unfortunates one and all fell into them, and succumbed in the whimsical ordeals through which they passed at unawares. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon did not study her suitors, she played the spy upon them. A careless word, or a joke, and the lady did not understand jokes very well, was excuse enough to dismiss an aspirant as found wanting. This had neither spirit nor delicacy; that was untruthful and not a Christian; one wanted to cut down tall timber and coin money under the marriage canopy; another was not the man to make nor happy; or, again, she had her suspicions of gout in the family, or took fright at her wooer’s antecedents. Like Mother Church, she would fain see a priest without blemish at her altar. And then Rose Marie Victoire made the worst of herself, and was as anxious to be loved, with all her factitious plainness and imaginary faults, as other women are to be married for virtues which they have not and for borrowed beauty. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Gormen’s ambition had its source in the finest instincts of womanhood. She would reward her lover by discovering to him a thousand virtues after marriage, as other women reveal the many little faults kept hitherto strenuously out of sight. But no one understood. The noble girl came in contact with none but commonplace natures, with whom practical interests came first; the finer calculations of feeling were beyond their comprehension.</p>
			<p>She grew more and more conspicuous as the critical period so ingeniously called “second youth” drew nearer. Her fancy for making the worst of herself with increasing success frightened away the latest recruits; they hesitated to unite their lot with hers. The strategy of her game of hoodman-blind (the virtues to be revealed when the finder’s eyes were opened) was a complex study for which few men have inclination; they prefer perfection ready-made. An ever-present dread of being married for her money made her unreasonably distrustful and uneasy. She fell foul of the rich, and the rich could look higher; she was afraid of poor men, she would not believe them capable of that disinterestedness on which she set such store; till at length her rejections and other circumstances let in an unexpected light upon the minds of suitors thus presented for her selection like dried peas on a seedman’s sieve. Every time a marriage project came to nothing, the unfortunate girl, being gradually led to despise mankind, saw the other sex at last in a false light. Inevitably, in her inmost soul, she grew misanthropic, a tinge of bitterness was infused into her conversation, a certain harshness into her expression. And her manners became more and more rigid under the stress of enforced celibacy; in her despair she sought to perfect herself. It was a noble vengeance. She would polish and cut for God the rough diamond rejected by men.</p>
			<p>Before long public opinion was against <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Corraon. People accept the verdict which a woman passes upon herself if, being free to marry, she fails to fulfil expectations, or is known to have refused eligible suitors. Everyone decides that she has her own reasons for declining marriage, and those reasons are always misinterpreted. There was some hidden physical defect or deformity, they said; but she, poor girl, was pure as an angel, healthy as a child, and overflowing with kindness. Nature had meant her to know all the joys, all the happiness, all the burdens of motherhood.</p>
			<p>Yet in her person <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon did not find a natural auxiliary to gain her heart’s desire. She had no beauty, save of the kind so improperly called “the devil’s”; that full-blown freshness of youth which, theologically speaking, the Devil never could have possessed; unless, indeed, we are to look for an explanation of the expression in the Devil’s continual desire of refreshing himself. The heiress’ feet were large and flat; when, on rainy days, she crossed the wet streets between her house and <abbr>St.</abbr> Léonard’s, her raised skirt displayed (without malice, be it said) a leg which scarcely seemed to belong to a woman, so muscular was it, with a small, firm, prominent calf like a sailor’s. She had a figure for a wet nurse. Her thick, honest waist, her strong, plump arms, her red hands; everything about her, in short, was in keeping with the round, expansive contours and portly fairness of the Norman style of beauty. Wide open, prominent eyes of no particular color gave to a face, by no means distinguished in its round outlines, a sheepish, astonished expression not altogether inappropriate, however, in an old maid: even if Rose had not been innocent, she must still have seemed so. An aquiline nose was oddly assorted with a low forehead, for a feature of that type is almost invariably found in company with a lofty brow. In spite of thick, red lips, the sign of great kindliness of nature, there were evidently so few ideas behind that forehead, that Rose’s heart could scarcely have been directed by her brain. Kind she must certainly be, but not gracious. And we are apt to judge the defects of goodness very harshly, while we make the most oi the redeeming qualities of vice.</p>
			<p>An extraordinary length of chestnut hair lent Rose Cormon such beauty as belongs to vigor and luxuriance, her chief personal characteristics. In the time of her pretensions she had a trick of turning her face in three-quarters profile to display a very pretty ear, gracefully set between the azure-streaked white throat and the temple, and thrown into relief by thick masses of her hair. Dressed in a ball gown, with her head poised at this angle, Rose might almost seem beautiful. With her protuberant bust, her waist, her high health, she used to draw exclamations of admiration from Imperial officers “What a fine girl!” they used to say.</p>
			<p>But, as years went on, the stoutness induced by a quiet, regular life distributed itself so unfortunately over her person, that its original proportions were destroyed. No known variety of corset could have discovered the poor spinster’s hips at this period of her existence; she might have been cast in one uniform piece. The youthful proportions of her figure were completely lost; her dimensions had grown so excessive, that no one could see her stoop without fearing that, being so top-heavy, she would certainly overbalance herself; but nature had provided a sufficient natural counterpoise, which enabled her to dispense with all adventitious aid from “dress improvers.” Everything about Rose was very genuine.</p>
			<p>Her chin developed a triple fold, which reduced the apparent length of her throat, and made it no easy matter to turn her head. She had no wrinkles, she had creases. Wags used to assert that she powdered herself, as nurses powder babies, to prevent chafing of the skin. To a young man, consumed, like Athanase, with suppressed desires, this excessive corpulence offered just the kind of physical charm which could not fail to attract youth. Youthful imaginations, essentially intrepid, stimulated by appetite, are prone to dilate upon the beauties of that living expanse. So docs the plump partridge allure the epicure’s knife. And, indeed, any debt-burdened young man of fashion in Paris would have resigned himself readily enough to fulfilling his part of the contract and making <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon happy. Still the unfortunate spinster had already passed her fortieth year!</p>
			<p>At this period of enforced loneliness, after the long, vain struggle to fill her life with those interests that are all in all to woman, she was fortifying herself in virtue by the most strict observance of religious duties: she had turned to the great consolation of well-preserved virginity. A confessor, endowed with no great wisdom, had directed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon in the paths of asceticism for some three years past, recommending a system of self-scourging calculated, according to modern doctors, to produce an effect the exact opposite of that expected by the poor priest, whose knowledge of hygiene was but limited. These absurd practices were beginning to bring a certain monastic tinge to Rose Cormon’s face; with frequent pangs of despair, she watched the sallow hues of middle age creeping across its natural white and red; while the trace of down about the corners of her upper lip showed a distinct tendency to darken and increase like smoke. Her temples grew shiny. She had passed the turning-point, in fact. It was known for certain in Alençon that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon suffered from heated blood. She inflicted her confidence upon the Chevalier de Valois, reckoning up the number of foot-baths that she took, and devising cooling treatment with him. And that shrewd observer would end by taking out his snuffbox, and gazing at the portrait of the Princess Goritza as he remarked, “But the real sedative, my dear young lady, would be a good and handsome husband.”</p>
			<p>“But whom could one trust?” returned she.</p>
			<p>But the Chevalier only flicked away the powdered snuff from the creases of his paduasoy waistcoat. To anybody else the proceeding would have seemed perfectly natural, but it always made the poor old maid feel uncomfortable.</p>
			<p>The violence of her objectless longings grew to such a height that she shrank from looking a man in the face, so afraid was she that the thoughts which pierced her heart might be read in her eyes. It was one of her whims, possibly a later development of her former tactics, to behave almost ungraciously to the possible suitors towards whom she still felt herself attracted, so afraid was she of being accused of folly. Most people in her circle were utterly incapable of appreciating her motives, so noble throughout; they explained her manner to her coevals in single blessedness by a theory of revenge for some past slight.</p>
			<p>“With the beginning of the year 1815 Rose Cormon had reached the fatal age, to which she did not confess. She was forty-two. By this time her desire to be married had reached a degree of intensity bordering on monomania. She saw her chances of motherhood fast slipping away forever; and, in her divine ignorance, she longed above all things for children of her own. There was not a soul found in Alençon to impute a single unchaste desire to the virtuous girl. She loved love, taking all for granted, without realizing for herself what love would be⁠—a devout Agnes, incapable of inventing one of the little shifts of Molière’s heroine.</p>
			<p>She had been counting upon chance of late. The disbanding of the Imperial troops and the reconstruction of the King’s army was sending a tide of military men back to their native places, some of them on half-pay, some with pensions, some without, and all of them anxious to find some way of amending their bad fortune, and of finishing their days in a fashion which would mean the beginning of happiness for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon. It would be hard indeed if she could not find a single brave and honorable man among all those who were coming back to the neighborhood. He must have a sound constitution in the first place, he must be of suitable age, and a man whose personal character would serve as a passport to his Bonapartist opinions; perhaps he might even be willing to turn Royalist for the sake of gaining a lost social position.</p>
			<p>Supported by these mental calculations. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon maintained the severity of her attitude for the first few months of the year; but the men that came back to the town were all either too old or too young, or their characters were too bad, or their opinions too Bonapartist, or their station in life was incompatible with her position, fortune, and habits. The case grew more and more desperate every day. Officers high in the service had used their advantages under Napoleon to marry, and these gentlemen now became Royalists for the sake of their families. In vain had she put up prayers to heaven to send her a husband that she might be happy in Christian fashion; it was written, no doubt, that she should die virgin and martyr, for not a single likely-looking man presented himself.</p>
			<p>In the course of conversation in her drawing-room of an evening, the frequenters of the house kept the police register under tolerably strict supervision; no one could arrive in Alençon but they informed themselves at once as to the newcomer’s mode of life, quality, and fortune. But, at the same time, Alençon is not a town to attract many strangers; it is not on the highroad to any larger city; there are no chance arrivals; naval officers on their way to Brest do not so much as stop in the place.</p>
			<p>Poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon at last comprehended that her choice was reduced to the natives. At times her eyes took an almost fierce expression, to which the Chevalier would respond with a keen glance at her as he drew out his snuffbox to gaze at the Princess Goritza. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois knew that in feminine jurisprudence, fidelity to an old love is a guarantee for the new. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, it cannot be denied, was not very intelligent. His snuffbox strategy was wasted upon her.</p>
			<p>She redoubled her watchfulness, the better to combat the “evil one,” and with devout rigidness and the sternest principles she consigned her cruel sufferings to the secret places of her life.</p>
			<p>At night, when she was alone, she thought of her lost youth, of her faded bloom, of the thwarted instincts of her nature; and while she laid her passionate longings at the foot of the Cross, together with all the poetry doomed to remain pent within her, she vowed inwardly to take the first man that was willing to marry her. Just as he was, without putting him to any proof whatsoever. Sounding her own dispositions, after a series of vigils, each more trying than the last, in her own mind she went so far as to espouse a sublieutenant, a tobacco-smoker to boot; nay, he was even head over ears in debt. Him she proposed to transform with care, submission, and gentleness into a pattern for mankind. But only in the silence of night could she plan these imaginary marriages, in which she amused herself with playing the sublime part of guardian angel; with morning, if Josette found her mistress’ bedclothes turned topsy-turvy, mademoiselle had recovered, her dignity; with morning, after breakfast, she would have nothing less than a solid landowner, a well-preserved man of forty⁠—a young man, as you may say.</p>
			<p>The Abbé de Sponde was incapable of giving his niece assistance of any sort in schemes for marriage. The good man, aged, seventy or thereabouts, referred all the calamities of the Revolution to the design of a Providence prompt to punish a dissolute Church. For which reasons <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Sponde had long since entered upon a deserted path to heaven, the way trodden by the hermits of old. He led an ascetic life, simply, unobtrusively, hiding his deeds of charity, his constant prayer and fasting from all other eyes. Necessity was laid upon all priests, he thought, to do as he did; he preached by example, turning a serene and smiling face upon the world, while he completely cut himself off from worldly interests. All his thoughts were given to the afflicted, to the needs of the Church, and the saving of his own soul. He left the management of his property to his niece. She paid over his yearly income to him, and, after a slight deduction for his maintenance, the whole of it went in private almsgiving or in donations to the Church.</p>
			<p>All the Abbé’s affections were centered upon his niece, and she looked upon him as a father. He was a somewhat absentminded father, however, without the remotest conception of the rebellion of the flesh; a father who gave thanks to God for maintaining his beloved daughter in a state of virginity; for from his youth up he had held, with <abbr>St.</abbr> John Chrysostom,</p>
			<p>“that virginity is as much above the estate of marriage as the angels are above man.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was accustomed to look up to her uncle; she did not venture to confide her wishes for a change of condition to him; and he, good man, on his side was accustomed to the ways of the house, and perhaps might not have relished the introduction of a master into it. Absorbed in thoughts of the distress which he relieved, or lost in fathomless inner depths of prayer, he was often unconscious of what was going on about him; frequenters of the house set this down to absentmindedness; but while he said little, his silence was neither unsociable nor ungenial. A tall, spare, grave, and solemn man, his face told of kindly feeling and a great inward peace. His presence in the house seemed as it were to consecrate it. The Abbé entertained a strong liking for that elderly sceptic the Chevalier de Valois. Far apart as their lives were, the two grand wrecks of the eighteenth century clergy and noblesse recognized each other by generic signs and tokens; and the Chevalier, for that matter, could converse with unction with the Abbé, just as he talked like a father with his grisettes.</p>
			<p>Some may think that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon would leave no means untried to gain her end; that among other permissible feminine artifices, for instance, she would turn to her toilettes, wear low-cut bodices, use the passive coquetry of a display of the splendid equipment with which she might take the field. On the contrary, she was as heroic and steadfast in her high-necked gown as a sentry in his sentry-box. All her dresses, bonnets, and finery were made in Alençon by two hunchbacked sisters, not wanting in taste. But in spite of the entreaties of the two artists. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon utterly declined the adventitious aid of elegance; she must be substantial throughout, body and plumage, and possibly her heavy-looking dresses became her not amiss. Laugh who will at her, poor thing. Generous natures, those who never trouble themselves about the form in which good feeling shows itself, but admire it wherever they find it, will sec something sublime in this trait.</p>
			<p>Perhaps some slight-natured feminine critic may begin to carp, and say that there is no woman in France so simple but that she can angle for a husband; that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon is one of those abnormal creatures which common sense forbids us to take for a type; that the best or the most babyish unmarried woman that has a mind to hook a gudgeon can put forward some physical charm wherewith to bait her line. But when you begin to think that the sublime Apostolic Roman Catholic is still a power in Brittany and the ancient duchy of Alençon, these criticisms fall to the ground. Faith and piety admit no such subtleties. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon kept to the straight path, preferring the misfortunes of a maidenhood infinitely prolonged to the misery of untruthfulness, to the sin of small deceit. Armed with self-discipline, such a girl cannot make a sacrifice of a principle; and therefore love (or self-interest) must make a determined effort to find her out and win her.</p>
			<p>Let us have the courage to make a confession, painful in these days when religion is nothing but a means of advancement for some, a dream for others; the devout are subject to a kind of moral ophthalmia, which, by the especial grace of Providence, removes a host of small earthly concerns out of the sight of the pilgrim of Eternity. In a word, the devout are apt to be dense in a good many ways. Their stupidity, at the same time, is a measure of the force with which their spirits turn heavenwards; albeit the sceptical <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois maintained that it is a moot point whether stupid women take naturally to piety, or whether piety, on the other hand, has a stupefying effect upon an intelligent girl.</p>
			<p>It must be borne in mind that it is the purest orthodox goodness, ready to drink rapturously of every cup set before it, to submit devoutly to the will of God, to see the print of the divine finger everywhere in the day of life⁠—that it is catholic virtue stealing like hidden light into the innermost recesses of this History that alone can bring everything into right relief, and widen its significance for those who yet have faith. And, again, if the stupidity is admitted, why should the misfortunes of stupidity be less interesting than the woes of genius in a world where fools so overwhelmingly preponderate?</p>
			<p>To resume. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s divine girlish ignorance of life was an offence in the eyes of the world. She was anything but observant, as her treatment of her suitors sufficiently showed. At this very moment, a girl of sixteen who had never opened a novel in her life might have read a hundred chapters of romance in Athanase’s eyes. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon saw nothing all the while; she never knew that the young man’s voice was unsteady with emotion which he dared not express, and the woman who could invent refinements of high sentiment to her own undoing could not discern the same feelings in Athanase.</p>
			<p>Those who know that qualities of heart and brain are as independent of each other as genius and greatness of soul, will see nothing extraordinary in this psychological phenomenon. A complete human being is so rare a prodigy, that Socrates, that pearl among mankind, agreed with a contemporary phrenologist that he himself was born to be a very scurvy knave. A great general may save his country at Zurich, and yet take a commission from contractors; a banker’s doubtful honesty does not prevent him from being a statesman; a great composer may give the world divine music, and yet forge another man’s signature, and a woman of refined feeling may be excessively weak-minded. In short, a devout woman may have a very lofty soul, and yet have no ears to hear the voice of another noble soul at her side.</p>
			<p>The unaccountable freaks of physical infirmity find a parallel in the moral world. Here was a good creature making her preserves and breaking her heart till she grew almost ridiculous, because, forsooth, there was no one to eat them but her uncle and herself. Those who sympathized with her for the sake of her good qualities, or, in some cases, on account of her defects, used to laugh over her disappointments. People began to wonder what would become of so fine a property with all <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s savings, and her uncle’s to boot.</p>
			<p>It was long since they began to suspect that at bottom, and in spite of appearances, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was “an original.” Originality is not allowed in the provinces; originality means that you have ideas which nobody else can understand, and in a country town people’s intellects, like their manner of life, must all be on a level. Even in 1804 Hose’s matrimonial prospects were considered so problematical, that “to marry like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon” was a current saying in Alençon, and the most ironical way of suggesting Such-an-one would never marry at all.</p>
			<p>The necessity to laugh at someone must indeed be imperious in France, if anyone could be found to raise a smile at the expense of that excellent creature. Not merely did she entertain the whole town, she was charitable, she was good; she was incapable of saying a spiteful word; and more than that, she was so much in unison with the whole spirit of the place, its manners and its customs, that she was generally beloved as the very incarnation of the life of the province; she had imbibed all its prejudices and made its interests hers; she had never gone beyond its limits, she adored it; she was embedded in provincial tradition. In spite of her eighteen thousand livres per annum, a tolerably large income for the neighborhood, she accommodated herself to the ways of her less wealthy neighbors. When she went to her country house, the Prébaudet, for instance, she drove over in an old-fashioned wicker cariole hung with white leather straps, and fitted with a couple of rusty weather-beaten leather curtains, which scarcely closed it in. The equipage, drawn by a fat broken-winded mare, was known all over the town. Jacquelin, the manservant, cleaned it as carefully as if it had been the finest brougham from Paris. Mademoiselle was fond of it; it had lasted her a dozen years, a fact which she was wont to point out with the triumphant joy of contented parsimony. Most people were grateful to her for forbearing to humiliate them by splendor which she might have flaunted before their eyes; it is even credible that if she had sent for a calèche from Paris, it would have caused more talk than any of her “disappointments.” After all, the finest carriage in the world, like the old-fashioned cariole, could only have taken her to the Prébaudet; and in the provinces they always keep the end in view, and trouble themselves very little about the elegance of the means, provided that they are sufficient.</p>
			<p>To complete the picture of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s household and domestic life, several figures must be grouped round <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon and the Abbé de Sponde. Jacquelin, and Josette, and Mariette, the cook, ministered to the comfort of uncle and niece.</p>
			<p>Jacquelin, a man of forty, short and stout, dark-haired and ruddy, with a countenance of the Breton sailor type, had been in service in the house for twenty-two years. He waited at table, groomed the mare, worked in the garden, cleaned the Abbé’s shoes, ran errands, chopped firewood, drove the cariole, went to the Prébaudet for corn, hay and straw, and slept like a dormouse in the antechamber of an evening. He was supposed to be fond of Josette, and Josette was six-and-thirty. But if she had married him, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon would have dismissed her, and so the poor lovers were fain to save up their wages in silence, and to wait and hope for mademoiselle’s marriage, much as the Jews look for the advent of the Messiah.</p>
			<p>Josette came from the district between Alençon and Mortagne; she was a fat little woman. Her face, which reminded you of a mud-bespattered apricot, was not wanting either in character or intelligence. She was supposed to rule her mistress. Josette and Jacquelin, feeling sure of the event, found consolation, presumably by discounting the future. Mariette, the cook, had likewise been in the family for fifteen years; she was skilled in the cookery of the country and the preparation of the most esteemed provincial dishes.</p>
			<p>Perhaps the fat old bay mare, of the Normandy breed, which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon used to drive to the Prébaudet, ought to count a good deal, for the affection which the five inmates of the house bore the animal amounted to mania. Penelope, for that was her name, had been with them for eighteen years; find so well was she cared for, so regularly tended, that Jacquelin and mademoiselle hoped to get quite another ten years of work out of her. Penelope was a stock subject and source of interest in their lives. It seemed as if poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, with no child of her own, lavished all her maternal affection upon the lucky beast. Almost every human being leading a solitary life in a crowded world will surround himself with a make-believe family of some sort, and Penelope took the place of dogs, cats, or canaries.</p>
			<p>These four faithful servants⁠—for Penelope’s intelligence had been trained till it was very nearly on a par with the wits of the other three, while they had sunk pretty much into the dumb, submissive jog-trot life of the animal⁠—these four retainers came and went and did the same things day after day, with the unfailing regularity of clockwork. But, to use their own expression, “they had eaten their white bread first.” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon suffered from a fixed idea upon the nerves; and, after the wont of such sufferers, she grew fidgety and hard to please, not by force of nature, but because she had no outlet for her energies. She had neither husband nor children to fill her thoughts, so they fastened upon trifles. She would talk for hours at a stretch of some inconceivably small matter, of a dozen serviettes, for instance, lettered Z, which somehow or other had been put before O.</p>
			<p>“Why, what can Josette be thinking about?” she cried. “Has she no notion what she is doing?”</p>
			<p>Jacquelin chanced to be late in feeding Penelope one afternoon, so every day for a whole week afterwards mademoiselle inquired whether the horse had been fed at two o’clock. Her narrow imagination spent itself on small matters. A layer of dust forgotten by the feather mop, a slice of scorched toast, an omission to close the shutters on Jacquelin’s part when the sun shone in upon furniture and carpets⁠—all these important trifles produced serious trouble, mademoiselle lost her temper over them. “Nothing was the same as it used to be. The servants of old days were so changed that she did not know them. They were spoilt. She was too good to them,” and so forth and so forth. One day Josette gave her mistress the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper" xml:lang="fr">Journée du Chrétien</i> instead of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper" xml:lang="fr">Quinzaine de Pâques</i>. The whole town heard of the mistake before night. Mademoiselle had been obliged to get up and come out of church, disturbing whole rows of chairs and raising the wildest conjectures, so that she was obliged afterwards to give all her friends a full account of the mishap.</p>
			<p>“Josette,” she said mildly, when she had come the whole way home from <abbr>St.</abbr> Léonard’s, “this must never happen again.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was far from suspecting that it was a very fortunate thing for her that she could vent her spleen in petty squabbles. The mind, like the body, requires exercise; these quarrels were a sort of mental gymnastics. Josette and Jacquelin took such unevennesses of temper as the agricultural laborer takes the changes of the weather. The three good souls could say among themselves that “It is a fine day,” or “It rains,” without murmuring against the powers above. Sometimes in the kitchen of a morning they would wonder in what humor mademoiselle would wake, much as a farmer studies the morning mists. And of necessity <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon ended by seeing herself in all the infinitely small details which made up her life. Herself and God, her confessor and her washing-days, the preserves to be made, the services of the church to attend, and the uncle to take care of⁠—all these things absorbed faculties that were none of the strongest. For her the atoms of life were magnified by virtue of an optical process peculiar to the selfish or the self-absorbed. To so perfectly healthy a woman, the slightest symptom of indigestion was a positively alarming portent. She lived, moreover, under the ferule of the system of medicine practised by our grandsires; a drastic dose fit to kill Penelope, taken four times a year, merely gave <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon a fillip.</p>
			<p>What tremendous ransackings of the week’s dietary if Josette, assisting her mistress to dress, discovered a scarcely visible pimple on shoulders that still boasted a satin skin! What triumph if the maid could bring a certain hare to her mistress’ recollection, and trace the accursed pimple to its origin in that too heating article of food! With what joy the two women would cry, “It is the hare beyond a doubt!”</p>
			<p>“Mariette overseasoned it,” mademoiselle would add; “I always tell her not to overdo it for my uncle and me, but Mariette has no more memory than⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Than the hare,” suggested Josette.</p>
			<p>“It is the truth,” returned mademoiselle; “she has no more memory than the hare; you have just hit it.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Four times in a year, at the beginning of each season, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon went to spend a certain number of days at the Prébaudet. It was now the middle of May, when she liked to sec how her apple-trees had “snowed,” as they say in the cider country, an allusion to the white blossoms strewn in the orchards in the spring. When the circles of fallen petals look like snowdrifts under the trees, the proprietor may hope to have abundance of cider in the autumn. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon estimated her barrels, and at the same time superintended any necessary after-winter repairs, planning out work in the garden and orchard, from which she drew no inconsiderable supplies. Each time of year had its special business.</p>
			<p>Mademoiselle used to give a farewell dinner to her faithful inner circle before leaving, albeit she would see them again at the end of three weeks. All Alençon knew when the journey was to be undertaken. Anyone that had fallen behindhand immediately paid a call, her drawing-room was filled; everybody wished her a prosperous journey, as if she had been starting for Calcutta. Then, in the morning, all the tradespeople were standing in their doorways; everyone, great and small, watched the cariole go past, and it seemed as if everybody learned a piece of fresh news when one repeated after another, “So <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon is going to the Prébaudet.”</p>
			<p>One would remark, “She has bread ready baked, she has!”</p>
			<p>And his neighbor would return, “Eh! my lads, she is a good woman; if property always fell into such hands as hers, there would not be a beggar to be seen in the countryside.”</p>
			<p>Or another would exclaim, “Hullo! I should not wonder if our oldest vines are in flower, for there is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon setting out for the Prébaudet. How comes it that she is so little given to marrying?”</p>
			<p>“I should be quite ready to marry her, all the same,” a wag would answer. “The marriage is half made⁠—one side is willing, but the other isn’t. Pooh! the oven is heating for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier.”</p>
			<p>“<em><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier?</em> She has refused him.”</p>
			<p>At every house that evening people remarked solemnly, “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon has gone.”</p>
			<p>Or perhaps, “So you have let <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon go!”</p>
			<p>The Wednesday selected by Suzanne for making a scandal chanced to be this very day of leave-taking, when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon nearly drove Josette to distraction over the packing of the parcels which she meant to take with her. A good deal that was done and said in the town that morning was like to lend additional interest to the farewell gathering at night. While the old maid was busily making preparations for her journey; while the astute Chevalier was playing his game of piquet in the house of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande de Gordes, sister of the aged Marquis de Gordes, and queen of the aristocratic salon, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson had sounded the alarm bell in half a score of houses. There was not a soul but felt some curiosity to see what sort of figure the seducer would cut that evening; and to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson and the Chevalier de Valois it was an important matter to know how <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon would take the news, in her double quality of marriageable spinster and lady president of the Maternity Fund. As for the unsuspecting du Bousquier, he was taking the air on the Parade. He was just beginning to think that Suzanne had made a fool of him; and this suspicion only confirmed the rules which he had laid down with regard to womankind.</p>
			<p>On these high days the cloth was laid about half-past three in the Maison Cormon. Four o’clock was the state dinner hour in Alençon, on ordinary days they dined at two, as in the time of the Empire; but, then, they supped!</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon always felt an inexpressible sense of satisfaction when she was dressed to receive her guests as mistress of her house. It was one of the pleasures which she most relished, be it said without malice, though egoism certainly lay beneath the feeling. When thus arrayed for conquest, a ray of hope slid across the darkness of her soul; a voice within her cried that nature had not endowed her so abundantly in vain, that surely some enterprising man was about to appear for her. She felt the younger for the wish, and the fresher for her toilet; she looked at her stout figure with a certain elation; and afterwards, when she went downstairs to submit salon, study, and boudoir to an awful scrutiny, this sense of satisfaction still remained with her. To and fro she went, with the naive contentment of the rich man who feels conscious at every moment that he is rich and will lack for nothing all his life long. She looked round upon her furniture, the eternal furniture, the antiquities, the lacquered panels, and told herself that such fine things ought to have a master.</p>
			<p>After admiring the dining-room, where the space was filled by the long table with its snowy cloth, its score of covers symmetrically laid; after going through the roll-call of a squadron of bottles ordered up from the cellar, and making sure that each bore an honorable label; and finally, after a most minute verification of a score of little slips of paper on which the Abbé had written the names of the guests with a trembling hand⁠—it was the sole occasion on which he took an active part in the household, and the place of every guest always gave rise to grave discussion⁠—after this review, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon in her fine array went into the garden to join her uncle; for at this pleasantest hour of the day he used to walk up and down the terrace beside the Brillante, listening to the twittering of the birds, which, hidden closely among the leaves in the lime-tree walk, knew no fear of boys or sportsmen.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon never came out to the Abbé during these intervals of waiting without asking some hopelessly absurd question, in the hope of drawing the good man into a discussion which might interest him. Her reasons for so doing must be given, for this very characteristic trait adds the finishing touch to her portrait.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon considered it a duly to talk; not that she was naturally loquacious, for, unfortunately, with her dearth of ideas and very limited stock of phrases, it was difficult to hold forth at any length; but she thought that in this way she was fulfilling the social duties prescribed by religion, which bids us be agreeable to our neighbor. It was a duty which weighed so much upon her mind, that she had submitted this case of conscience out of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Child’s Guide to Manners</i> to her director, the Abbé Couturier. Whereupon, so far from being disarmed by the penitent’s humble admission of the violence of her mental struggles to find something to say, the old ecclesiastic, being firm in matters of discipline, read her a whole chapter out of <abbr>St.</abbr> François de Sales on the Duties of a Woman in the World; on the decent gaiety of the pious Christian female, and the duty of confining her austerities to herself; a woman, according to this authority, ought to be amiable in her home and to act in such a sort that her neighbor never feels dull in her company. After- this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, with a deep sense of duty, was anxious to obey her director at any cost. He had bidden her to discourse agreeably, so every time the conversation languished she felt the perspiration breaking out over her with the violence of her exertions to find something to say which should stimulate the flagging interest. She would come out with odd remarks at such times. Once she revived, with some success, a discussion on the ubiquity of the apostles (of which she understood not a syllable) by the unexpected observation that “You cannot be in two places at once unless you are a bird.” With such conversational cues as these, the lady had earned the title of “dear, good <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon” in her set, which phrase, in the mouth of local wits, might be taken to mean that she was as ignorant as a carp, and a bit of a “natural;” but there were plenty of people of her own calibre to take the remark literally, and reply, “Oh yes, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon is very good.”</p>
			<p>Sometimes (always in her desire to be agreeable to her guests and fulfil her duties as a hostess) she asked such absurd questions that everybody burst out laughing. She wanted to know, for example, what the Government did with the taxes which it had been receiving all these years; or how it was that the Bible had not been printed in the time of Christ, seeing that it had been written by Moses. Altogether she was on a par with the English country gentleman, and member of the House of Commons, who made the famous speech in which he said, “I am always hearing of Posterity; I should very much like to know what Posterity has done for the country.”</p>
			<p>On such occasions, the heroic Chevalier de Valois came to the rescue, bringing up all the resources of his wit and tact at the sight of the smiles exchanged by pitiless smatterers. He loved to give to woman, did this elderly noble; he lent his wit to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon by coming to her assistance with a paradox, and covered her retreat so well, that sometimes it seemed as if she had said nothing foolish. She once owned seriously that she did not know the difference between an ox and a bull. The enchanting Chevalier stopped the roars of laughter by saying that oxen could never be more than uncles to the bullocks. Another time, hearing much talk of cattle-breeding and its difficulties⁠—a topic which often comes up in conversation in the neighborhood of the superb du Pin stud⁠—she so far grasped the technicalities of horse breeding to ask, “Why, if they wanted colts, they did not serve a mare twice a year.” The Chevalier drew down the laughter upon himself.</p>
			<p>“It is quite possible,” said he. The company pricked up their ears.</p>
			<p>“The fault lies with the naturalists,” he continued; “they have not found out how to breed mares that are less than eleven months in foal.”</p>
			<p>Poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon no more understood the meaning of the words than the difference between the ox and the bull. The Chevalier met with no gratitude for his pains; his chivalrous services were beyond the reach of the lady’s comprehension. She saw that the conversation grew livelier; she was relieved to find that she was not so stupid as she imagined. A day came at last when she settled down in her ignorance, like the Duc de Brancas; and the hero of <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">Le Distrait</i>, it may be remembered, made himself so comfortable in the ditch after his fall, that when the people came to pull him out, he asked what they wanted with him. Since a somewhat recent period <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon had lost her fears. She brought out her conversational cues with a self-possession akin to that solemn manner⁠—the very coxcombry of stupidity⁠—which accompanies the fatuous utterances of British patriotism.</p>
			<p>As she went with stately steps towards the terrace therefore, she was chewing the cud of reflection, seeking for some question which should draw her uncle out of a silence which always hurt her feelings; she thought that he felt dull.</p>
			<p>“Uncle,” she began, hanging on his arm, and nestling joyously close to him (for this was another of her make-believes, “If I had a husband, I should do just so!” she thought)⁠—“Uncle, if everything on earth happens by the will of God, there must be a reason for everything.”</p>
			<p>“Assuredly,” the Abbé de Sponde answered gravely. He loved his niece, and submitted with angelic patience to be torn from his meditations.</p>
			<p>“Then if I never marry at all, it will be because it is the will of God?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, my child.”</p>
			<p>“But still, as there is nothing to prevent me from marrying tomorrow, my will perhaps might thwart the will of God?”</p>
			<p>“That might be so, if we really knew God’s will,” returned the sub-prior of the Sorbonne. “Remark, my dear, that you insert an <em>if</em>.”</p>
			<p>Poor Rose was bewildered. She had hoped to lead her uncle to the subject of marriage by way of an argument <i xml:lang="la">ad omnipotentem</i>. But the naturally obtuse are wont to adopt the remorseless logic of childhood, which is to say, they proceed from the answer to another question, a method frequently found embarrassing.</p>
			<p>“But, uncle,” she persisted, “God cannot mean women never to marry; for if He did, all of them ought to be either unmarried or married. Their lots are distributed unjustly.”</p>
			<p>“My child,” said the good Abbé, “you are finding fault with the Church, which teaches that celibacy is a more excellent way to God.”</p>
			<p>“But if the Church was right, and everybody was a good Catholic, there would soon be no more people, uncle.”</p>
			<p>“You are too ingenious. Rose; there is no need to be so ingenious to be happy.”</p>
			<p>Such words brought a smile of satisfaction to poor Rose’s lips and confirmed her in the good opinion which she began to conceive of herself. Behold how the world, like our friends and enemies, contributes to strengthen our faults. At this moment guests began to arrive, and the conversation was interrupted. On these high festival occasions, the disposition of the rooms brought about little familiarities between the servants and invited guests. Mariette saw the President of the Tribunal, a triple expansion glutton, as he passed by her kitchen.</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Ronceret, I have been making cauliflower au gratin on purpose for you, for mademoiselle knows how fond you are of it. ‘Mind you do not fail with it, Mariette,’ she said; ‘<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Président is coming.’⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Good <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon,” returned the man of law. “Mariette, did you baste the cauliflowers with gravy instead of stock? It is more savory.” And the President did not disdain to enter the council-chamber where Mariette ruled the roast, nor to cast an epicure’s eye over her preparations, and give his opinion as a master of the craft.</p>
			<p>“Good day, madame,” said Josette, addressing <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Grancon, who sedulously cultivated the waiting-woman. “Mademoiselle has not forgotten you; you are to have a dish of fish.”</p>
			<p>As for the Chevalier de Valois, he spoke to Mariette with the jocularity of a great noble unbending to an inferior:</p>
			<p>“Well, dear cordon bleu, I would give you the Cross of the Legion of Honor if I could; tell me, is there any dainty morsel for which one ought to save oneself?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois, a hare from the Prébaudet; it weighed fourteen pounds!”</p>
			<p>“That’s a good girl,” said the Chevalier, patting Josette on the cheek with two fingers. “Ah! weighs fourteen pounds, docs it?”</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier was not of the party. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon treated him hardly, faithful to her system before described. In the very bottom of her heart she felt an inexplicable drawing towards this man of fifty, whom she had once refused. Sometimes she repented of that refusal, and yet she had a presentiment that she should marry him after all, and a dread of him which forbade her to wish for the marriage. These ideas stimulated her interest in du Bousquier. The Republican’s herculean proportions produced an effect upon her which she would not admit to herself; and the Chevalier de Valois and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, while they could not explain <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s inconsistencies, had detected naive, furtive glances, sufficiently clear in their significance to set them both on the watch to ruin the hopes which du Bousquier clearly entertained in spite of a first check.</p>
			<p>Two guests kept the others waiting, but their official duties excused them both. One was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Coudrai, registrar of mortgages; the other, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Choisnel, had once acted as land-steward to the Marquis de Gordes. Choisnel was the notary of the old noblesse, and received everywhere among them with the distinction which his merits deserved; he had besides a not inconsiderable private fortune. When the two late comers arrived, Jacquelin, the manservant, seeing them turn to go into the drawing-room, came forward with, “ ‘They’ are all in the garden.”</p>
			<p>The registrar of mortgages was one of the most amiable men in the town. There were but two things against him⁠—he had married an old woman for her money in the first place and in the second it was his habit to perpetrate outrageous puns, at which he was the first to laugh. But, doubtless, the stomachs of the guests were growing impatient, for at first sight he was hailed with that faint sigh which usually welcomes last comers under such circumstances. Pending the official announcement of dinner, the company strolled up and down the terrace by the Brillante, looking out over the stream with its bed of mosaic and its water-plants, at the so picturesque details of the row of houses huddled together on the opposite bank; the old-fashioned wooden balconies, the tumbledown window sills, the balks of timber that shored up a story projecting over the river, the cabinetmaker’s workshop, the tiny gardens where odds and ends of clothing were hanging out to dry. It was, in short, the poor quarter of a country town, to which the near neighborhood of the water, a weeping willow drooping over the bank, a rosebush or so, and a few flowers, had lent an indescribable charm, worthy of a landscape painter’s brush.</p>
			<p>The Chevalier meanwhile was narrowly watching the faces of the guests. He knew that his firebrand had very successfully taken hold of the best coteries in the town; but no one spoke openly of Suzanne and du Bousquier and the great news as yet. The art of distilling scandal is possessed by provincials in a supreme degree. It was felt that the time was not yet ripe for open discussion of the strange event. Everyone was bound to go through a private rehearsal first. So it was whispered:</p>
			<p>“Have you heard?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“Du Bousquier?”</p>
			<p>“And the fair Suzanne.”</p>
			<p>“Does <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon know anything?”</p>
			<p>“No.”</p>
			<p>“Ah!”</p>
			<p>This was gossip piano, presently destined to swell into a crescendo when they were ready to discuss the first dish cf scandal.</p>
			<p>All of a sudden the Chevalier confronted <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson. That lady had sported her green bonnet, trimmed with auriculas: her face was beaming. Was she simply longing to begin the concert? Such news is as good as a goldmine to be worked in the monotonous lives of these people; but the observant and uneasy Chevalier fancied that he read something more in the good lady’s expression⁠—to wit, the exultation of self-interest! At once he turned to look at Athanase, and detected in his silence the signs of profound concentration of some kind. In another moment the young man’s glance at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s figure, which sufficiently resembled a pair of regimental kettledrums, shot a sudden light across the Chevalier’s brain. By that gleam he could read the whole past.</p>
			<p>“Egad!” he said to himself, “what a slap in the face I have laid myself out to get!”</p>
			<p>He went across to offer his arm to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, so that he might afterwards take her in to dinner. She regarded the Chevalier with respectful esteem; for, in truth, with his name and position in the aristocratic constellations of the province, he was one of the most brilliant ornaments of her salon. In her heart of hearts, she had longed to be <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> de Valois at any time during the past twelve years. The name was like a branch for the swarming thoughts of her brain to cling about⁠—he fulfilled ail her ideals as to the birth, quality, and externals of an eligible man. But while the Chevalier de Valois was the choice of heart and brain and social ambition, the elderly ruin, curled though he was like a <abbr>St.</abbr> John of a procession-day, filled <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon with dismay; the heiress saw nothing but the noble; the woman could not think of him as a husband. The Chevalier’s affectation of indifference to marriage, and still more his unimpeachable character in a houseful of workgirls, had seriously injured him, contrary to his own expectations. The man of quality, so clear-sighted in the matter of the annuity, miscalculated on this subject; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon herself was not aware that her private reflections upon the too well-conducted Chevalier might have been translated by the remark, “What a pity that he is not a little bit of a rake!”</p>
			<p>Students of human nature have remarked these leanings of the saint towards the sinner, and wondered at a taste so little in accordance, as they imagine, with Christian virtue. But, to</p>
			<p>At once he turned to look at Athanase go no further, what nobler destiny for a virtuous woman than the task of cleansing, after the manner of charcoal, the turbid waters of vice? How is it that nobody has seen that these generous creatures, confined by their principles to strict conjugal fidelity, must naturally desire a mate of great practical experience? A reformed rake makes the best husband. And so it came to pass that the poor spinster must sigh over the chosen vessel, offered her as it were in two pieces. Heaven alone could weld the Chevalier de Valois and du Bousquier in one.</p>
			<p>If the significance of the few words exchanged between the Chevalier and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon is to be properly understood, it is necessary to put other matters before the reader. Two very serious questions were dividing Alençon into two camps, and, moreover, du Bousquier was mixed up in both affairs in some mysterious way. The first of these debates concerned the curé. He had taken the oath of allegiance in the time of the Revolution, and now was living down orthodox prejudices by setting an example of the loftiest goodness. He was a Cheverus on a smaller scale, and so much was he appreciated, that when he died the whole town wept for him. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon and the Abbé de Sponde belonged, however, to the minority, to the Church sublime in its orthodoxy, a section which was to the Court of Rome as the Ultras were shortly to be to the Court of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>. The Abbé, in particular, declined to recognize the Church that had submitted to force and made terms with the Constitutionnels. So the curé was never seen in the salon of the Maison Cormon, and the sympathies of its frequenters were with the officiating priest of <abbr>St.</abbr> Léonard’s, the aristocratic church in Alençon. Du Bousquier, that rabid Liberal under a Royalist’s skin, knew how necessary it is to find standards to rally the discontented, who form, as it were, the back-shop of every opposition, and therefore he had already enlisted the sympathies of the trading classes for the curé.</p>
			<p>Now for the second affair. The same blunt diplomatist was the secret instigator of a scheme for building a theatre, an idea which had only lately sprouted in Alençon. Du Bousquier’s zealots knew not their Muhammad, but they were more ardent in their defence of what they believed to be their own plan. Athanase was one of the very hottest of the partisans in favor of the theatre; in the mayor’s office for several days past he had been pleading for the cause which all the younger men had taken up.</p>
			<p>To return to the Chevalier. He offered his arm to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, who thanked him with a radiant glance for this attention. For all answer, the Chevalier indicated Athanase by a meaning look.</p>
			<p>“Mademoiselle,” he began, “as you have such well-balanced Judgment in matters of social convention, and as that young man is related to you in some way⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Very distantly,” she broke in.</p>
			<p>“Ought you not to use the influence which you possess with him and his mother to prevent him from going utterly to the bad? He is not very religious as it is; he defends that perjured priest; but that is nothing. It is a much more serious matter; is he not plunging thoughtlessly into opposition without realizing how his conduct may affect his prospects? He is scheming to build this theatre; he is the dupe of that Republican in disguise, du Bousquier⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Dear me, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois, his mother tells me that he is so clever, and he has not a word to say for himself; he always stands planted before you like a statute⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Of limitations,” cried the registrar. “I caught that flying.⁠—I present my <i xml:lang="und">devoars</i> to the Chevalier de Valois,” he added, saluting the latter with the exaggeration of Henri Monnier as “Joseph Prudhomme,” an admirable type of the class to which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Coudrai belonged.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois, in return, gave him the abbreviated patronizing nod of a noble standing on his dignity; then he drew <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon further along the terrace by the distance of several flowerpots, to make the registrar understand that he did not wish to be overheard.</p>
			<p>Then, lowering his voice, he bent to say in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s ear: “How can you expect that lads educated in these detestable Imperial Lyceums should have any ideas? Great ideas and a lofty love can only come of right courses and nobleness of life. It is not difficult to foresee, from the look of the poor fellow, that he will be weak in his intellect and come to a miserable end. See how pale and haggard he looks l”</p>
			<p>“His mother says that he works far too hard,” she replied innocently. “He spends his nights, think of it! in reading books and writing. What good can it possibly do a young man’s prospects to sit up writing at night?”</p>
			<p>“Why, it exhausts him,” said the Chevalier, trying to bring the lady’s thoughts back to the point, which was to disgust her with Athanase. “The things that went on in those Imperial Lyceums were something really shocking.”</p>
			<p>“Oh yes,” said the simple lady. “Did they not make them walk out with drums in front? The masters had no more religion than heathens; and they put them in uniform, poor boys, exactly as if they had been soldiers. What notions!”</p>
			<p>“And see what comes of it,” continued the Chevalier, indicating Athanase. “In my time, where was the young man that could not look a pretty woman in the face? Now, he lowers his eyes as soon as he sees you. That young man alarms me, because I am interested in him. Tell him not to intrigue with Bonapartists, as he is doing, to build this theatre; if these little youngsters do not raise an insurrection and demand it (for insurrection and constitution, to my mind, are two words for the same thing), the authorities will build it. And tell his mother to look after him.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, she will not allow him to see these half-pay people or to keep low company, I am sure. I will speak to him about it,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon; “he might lose his situation at the mayor’s office. And then what would they do, he and his mother? It makes you shudder.”</p>
			<p>As <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Talleyrand said of his wife, so said the Chevalier within himself at that moment, as he looked at the lady:</p>
			<p>“If there is a stupider woman, I should like to see her. On the honor of a gentleman, if virtue makes a woman so stupid as this, is it not a vice? And yet, what an adorable wife she would make for a man of my age! What principle! What ignorance of life!”</p>
			<p>Please to bear in mind that these remarks were addressed to the Princess Goritza during the manipulation of a pinch of snuff.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson felt instinctively that the Chevalier was talking of Athanase. In her eagerness to know what he had been saying, she followed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, who walked up to the young man in question, putting out six feet of dignity in front: but at that very moment Jacquelin announced that “Mademoiselle was served,” and the mistress of the house shot an appealing glance at the Chevalier. But the gallant registrar of mortgages was beginning to see a something in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois’ manner, a glimpse of the barrier which the noblesse were about to raise between themselves and the bourgeoisie; so, delighted with a chance to cut out the Chevalier, he crooked his arm, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was obliged to take it. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois, from motives of policy, fastened upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon takes the liveliest interest in your dear Athanase, my dear lady,” he said, as they slowly followed in the wake of the other guests, “but that interest is falling off through your son’s fault. He is lax and Liberal in his opinions; he is agitating for this theatre; he is mixed up with the Bonapartists; he takes the part of the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper" xml:lang="fr">Constitutionnel</i> curé. This line of conduct may cost him his situation. You know how carefully his Majesty’s government is weeding the service. If your dear Athanase is once cashiered, where will he find employment? He must not get into bad odor with the authorities.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Chevalier,” cried the poor startled mother, “what do I not owe you for telling me this! You are right; my boy is a tool in the hands of a bad set; I will open his eyes to his position.”</p>
			<p>It was long since the Chevalier had sounded Athanase’s character at a glance. He saw in the depths of the young man’s nature the scarcely malleable material of Republican convictions; a lad at that age will sacrifice everything for such ideas if he is smitten with the word Liberty, that so vague, so little comprehended word which is like a standard of revolt for those at the bottom of the wheel for whom revolt means revenge. Athanase was sure to stick to his opinions, for he had woven them, with his artist’s sorrows and his embittered views of the social framework, into his political creed. He was ready to sacrifice his future at the outset for these opinions, not knowing that he, like all men of real ability, would have seen reason to modify them by the time he reached the age of six-and-thirty, when a man has formed his own conclusions of life, with its intricate relations and interdependences. If Athanase was faithful to the opposition in Alençon, he would fall into disgrace with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon. Thus far the Chevalier saw clearly.</p>
			<p>And so this little town, so peaceful in appearance, was to the full as much agitated internally as any congress of diplomates, when craft and guile and passion and self-interest are met to discuss the weightiest questions between empire and empire.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile the guests gathered about the table were eating their way through the first course as people eat in the provinces, without a blush for an honest appetite; whereas, in Paris, it would appear that our jaws are controlled by sumptuary edicts which deliberately set the laws of anatomy at defiance. We eat with the tips of our teeth in Paris, we filch the pleasures of the table, but in the provinces things are taken more naturally; possibly existence centres a little too much about the great and universal method of maintenance to which God condemns all his creatures. It was at the end of the first course that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon brought out the most celebrated of all her conversational cues; it was talked of for two years afterwards; it is quoted even now, indeed, in the sub-bourgeois strata of Alençon whenever her marriage is under discussion. Over the last entrée but one, the conversation waxed lively and wordy, turning, as might have been expected, upon the affair of the theatre and the curé. In the first enthusiasm of Royalism in 1816, those extremists, who were afterwards called <i xml:lang="fr">les Jesuites du pays</i>, were for expelling the Abbé François from his curé. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois suspected du Bousquier of supporting the priest and instigating the intrigues; at any rate, the noble Chevalier piled the burdens on du Bousquier’s back with his wonted skill; and du Bousquier, being unrepresented by counsel, was condemned and put in the pillory. Among those present, Athanase was the only person sufficiently frank to stand up for the absent, and he felt that he was not in a position to bring out his ideas before these Alençon magnates, of whose intellects he had the meanest opinion. Only in the provinces nowadays will you find young men keeping a respectful countenance before people of a certain age without daring to have a fling at their elders or to contradict them too flatly. To resume. On the advent of some delicious canards aux olives, the conversation first decidedly flagged, and then suddenly dropped dead. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, emulous of her own poultry, invented another canard in her anxiety to defend du Bousquier, who had been represented as an arch-concocter of intrigue, and a man to set mountains fighting.</p>
			<p>“For my own part,” said she, “I thought that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier gave his whole attention to childish matters.”</p>
			<p>Under the circumstances, the epigram produced a tremendous effect. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon had a great success; she brought the Princess Goritza face downwards on the table. The Chevalier, by no means expecting his Dulcinea to say anything so much to the purpose, could find no words to express his admiration; he applauded after the Italian fashion, noiselessly, with the tips of his fingers.</p>
			<p>“She is adorably witty,” he said, turning to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson. “I have always said that she would unmask her batteries some day.”</p>
			<p>“But when you know her very well, she is charming,” said the widow.</p>
			<p>“All women, madame, have esprit when you know them well.”</p>
			<p>When the Homeric laughter subsided. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon asked for an explanation of her success. Then the chorus of scandal grew to a height. Du Bousquier was transformed into a bachelor Père Gigogne; it was he who filled the Foundling Hospital; the immorality of his life was laid bare at last; it was all of a piece with his Paris orgies, and so forth and so forth. Led by the Chevalier de Valois, the cleverest of conductors of this kind of orchestra, the overture was something magnificent.</p>
			<p>“I do not know,” said he, with much indulgence, “what there could possibly be to prevent a du Bousquier from marrying a Mademoiselle Suzanne whatever-it-is⁠—what do you call her?⁠—Suzette! I only know the children by sight, though I lodge with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Lardot. If this Suzon is a tall, fine-looking forward sort of girl with gray eyes, a slender figure, and little feet⁠—I have not paid much attention to these things, but she seemed to me to be very insolent and very much du Bousquier’s superior in the matter of manners. Besides, Suzanne has the nobility of beauty; from that point of view, she would certainly make a marriage beneath her. The Emperor Joseph, you know, had the curiosity to go to see the du Barry at Luciennes. He offered her his arm; and when the poor courtesan, overcome by such an honor, hesitated to take it, ‘Beauty is always a queen,’ said the Emperor. Remark that the Emperor Joseph was an Austrian German,” added the Chevalier; “but, believe me, that Germany, which we think of as a very boorish country, is really a land of noble chivalry and fine manners, especially towards Poland and Hungary, where there are⁠—” Here the Chevalier broke off, fearing to make an allusion to his own happy fortune in the past; he only took up his snuffbox and confided the rest to the Princess, who had smiled on him for thirty-six years.</p>
			<p>“The speech was delicately considerate for Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>,” said du Ronceret.</p>
			<p>“But we are talking of the Emperor Joseph, I believe,” returned <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, with a little knowing air.</p>
			<p>“Mademoiselle,” said the Chevalier, seeing the wicked glances exchanged by the President, the registrar, and the notary, “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Barry was Louis Quinze’s Suzanne, a fact known well enough to us scapegraces, but which young ladies are not expected to know. Your ignorance shows that the diamond is flawless. The corruptions of history have not so much as touched you.”</p>
			<p>At this the Abbé de Sponde looked graciously upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois and bent his head in laudatory approval.</p>
			<p>“Do you not know history, mademoiselle,” asked the registrar.</p>
			<p>“If you muddle up Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span> and Suzanne, how can you expect me to know your history?” was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s angelic reply. She was so pleased! The dish was empty and the conversation revived to such purpose that everybody was laughing with their mouths full at her last observation.</p>
			<p>“Poor young thing!” said the Abbé de Sponde. “When once trouble comes, that love grown divine called charity is as blind as the pagan love, and should see nothing of the causes of the trouble. You are President of the Maternity Society, Rose; this child will need help; it will not be easy for he’ to find a husband.”</p>
			<p>“Poor child!” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon.</p>
			<p>“Is du Bousquier going to marry her, do you suppose?” asked the President of the Tribunal.</p>
			<p>“It would be his duty to do so if he were a decent man,’ ” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson; “but, really, my dog has better notions of decency⁠—”</p>
			<p>“And yet Azor is a great forager,” put in the registrar, trying a joke this time as a change from a pun.</p>
			<p>They were still talking of du Bousquier over the dessert. He was the butt of uncounted playful jests, which grew more and more thunder-charged under the influence of wine. Led off by the registrar, they followed up one pun with another. Du Bousquier’s character was now apparent; he was not a father of the church, nor a reverend father, nor yet a conscript father, and so on and so on, till the Abbé de Sponde said, “In any case, he is not a foster-father,” with a gravity that checked the laughter.</p>
			<p>“Not a heavy father,” added the Chevalier.</p>
			<p>The Church and the aristocracy had descended into the arena of wordplay without loss of dignity.</p>
			<p>“Hush!” said the registrar, “I can hear du Bousquier’s boots creaking; he is in over shoes over boots, and no mistake.”</p>
			<p>It nearly always happens that when a man’s name is in everyone’s mouth, he is the last to hear what is said of him; the whole town may be talking of him, slandering him or crying him down, and if he has no friends to repeat what other people say of him, he is not likely to hear it. So the blameless du Bousquier, du Bousquier who would fain have been guilty, who wished that Suzanne had not lied to him, was supremely unconscious of all that was taking place. Nobody had spoken to him of Suzanne’s revelations; for that matter, everybody thought it indiscreet to ask questions about the affair, when the man most concerned sometimes possesses secrets which compel him to keep silence. So when people adjourned for coffee to the drawing-room, where several evening visitors were already assembled, du Bousquier wore an irresistible and slightly fatuous air.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, counseled by confusion, dared not look towards the terrible seducer. She took possession of Athanase and administered a lecture, bringing out the oddest assortment of the commonplaces of Royalist doctrines and edifying truisms. As the unlucky poet had no snuffbox with a portrait of a princess on the lid to sustain him under the shower-bath of foolish utterances, it was with a vacant expression that he heard his adored lady. His eyes were fixed on that enormous bust, which maintained the absolute repose characteristic of great masses. Desire wrought a kind of intoxication in him. The old maid’s thin, shrill voice became low music for his ears; her platitudes were fraught with ideas.</p>
			<p>Love is an utterer of false coin; he is always at work trans= forming common copper into gold louis; sometimes, also, he makes his seeming halfpence of fine gold.</p>
			<p>“Well, Athanase, will you promise me?”</p>
			<p>The final phrase struck on the young man’s ear; he woke with a start from a blissful dream.</p>
			<p>“What, mademoiselle?” returned he.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon rose abruptly and glanced across at du Bousquier. At that moment he looked like the brawny fabulous deity whose likeness you behold upon Republican three-franc pieces. She went over to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson and said in a confidential tone:</p>
			<p>“Your son is weak in his intellect, my poor friend. That lyceum has been the ruin of him,” she added, recollecting how the Chevalier de Valois had insisted on the bad education given in those institutions.</p>
			<p>Here was a thunderbolt! Poor Athanase had had his chance of flinging fire upon the dried stems heaped up in the old maid’s heart, and he had not known it! If he had but listened to her, he might have made her understand; for in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s present highly-wrought mood a word would have been enough, but the very force of the stupefying cravings of lovesick youth had spoiled his chances; so sometimes a child full of life kills himself through ignorance.</p>
			<p>“What can you have been saying to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon?” asked his mother.</p>
			<p>“Nothing.”</p>
			<p>“Nothing?⁠—I will have this cleared up,” she said, and put off serious business to the morrow; du Bousquier was hopelessly lost, she thought, and the speech troubled her very little.</p>
			<p>Soon the four card-tables received their complement of players. Four persons sat down to piquet, the most expensive amusement of the evening, over which a good deal of money changed hands. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Choisnel, the attorney for the crown, and a couple of ladies went to the red-lacquered cabinet for a game of trictrac. The candles in the wall-sconces were lighted, and then the flower of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s set blossomed out about the fire, on the settees, and about the tables. Each new couple, on entering the room, made the same remark to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, “So you are going to the Prébaudet tomorrow?”</p>
			<p>“Yes, I really must,” she said, in answer to each.</p>
			<p>All through the evening the hostess wore a preoccupied air. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson was the first to see that she was not at all like herself. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was thinking.</p>
			<p>“What are you thinking about, cousin?” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson asked at last, finding her sitting in the boudoir.</p>
			<p>“I am thinking of that poor girl. Am I not patroness of the Maternity Society? I will go now to find ten crowns for you.”</p>
			<p>“<em>Ten crowns!</em>” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson. “Why, you have never given so much to anyone before!”</p>
			<p>“But, my dear, it is so natural to have a child.”</p>
			<p>This improper cry from the heart struck the treasurer of the Maternity Society dumb from sheer astonishment. Du Bousquier had actually gone up in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s opinion!</p>
			<p>“Really,” began <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, “du Bousquier is not merely a monster⁠—he is a villain into the bargain. When a man has spoiled somebody else’s life, it is his duty surely to make amends. It should be his part rather than ours to rescue this young person; and when all comes to all, she is a bad girl, it seems to me, for there are better men in Alençon than that cynic of a du Bousquier. A girl must be shameless indeed to have anything to do with him.”</p>
			<p>“Cynic? Your son, dear, teaches you Latin words that are quite beyond me. Certainly I do not want to make excuses for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier; but explain to me why it is immoral for a woman to prefer one man to another?”</p>
			<p>“Dear cousin, suppose now that you were to marry my Athanase; there would be nothing but what was very natural in that. He is young and good-looking; he has a future before him; Alençon will be proud of him some day. But⁠—everyone would think that you took such a young man as your husband for the sake of greater conjugal felicity. Slanderous tongues would say that you were making a sufficient provision of bliss for yourself. There would be jealous women to bring charges of depravity against you. But what would it matter to you? You would be dearly loved⁠—loved sincerely. If Athanase seemed to you to be weak of intellect, my dear, it is because he has too many ideas. Extremes meet. He is as clean in his life as a girl of fifteen; <em>he</em> has not wallowed in the pollutions of Paris.⁠ ⁠… Well, now, change the terras, as my poor husband used to say. It is relatively just the same situation as du Bousquier’s and Suzanne’s. But what would be slander in your case is true in every way of du Bousquier. Now do you understand?”</p>
			<p>“No more than if you were talking Greek,” said Rose Cormon, opening wide eyes and exerting all the powers of her understanding.</p>
			<p>“Well, then, cousin, since one must put dots on all the t’s, it is quite out of the question that Suzanne should love du Bousquier. And when the heart counts for nothing in such an affair⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Why, really, cousin, how should people love if not with their hearts?”</p>
			<p>At this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson thought within herself, as the Chevalier had thought:</p>
			<p>“The poor cousin is too innocent by far. This goes beyond the permissible⁠—” Aloud she said, “Dear girl, it seems to me that a child is not conceived of spirit alone.”</p>
			<p>“Why, yes, dear, for the Holy Virgin⁠—”</p>
			<p>“But, my dear, good girl, du Bousquier is not the Holy Ghost.”</p>
			<p>“That is true,” returned the spinster; “He is a man⁠—a man dangerous enough for his friends to recommend him strongly to marry.”</p>
			<p>“You, cousin, might bring that about⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Oh, how?” cried the spinster, with a glow of Christian charity.</p>
			<p>“Decline to receive him until he takes a wife. For the sake of religion and morality, you ought to make an example of him under the circumstances.”</p>
			<p>“We will talk of this again, dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, when I come back from the Prébaudet. I will ask advice of my uncle and the Abbé Couturier,” and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon went back to the large drawing-room. The liveliest hour of the evening had begun.</p>
			<p>The lights, the groups of well-dressed women, the serious and magisterial air of the assembly, filled <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon with pride in the aristocratic appearance of the rooms, a pride in which her guests all shared. There were plenty of people who thought that the finest company of Paris itself was no finer. At that moment du Bousquier, playing a rubber with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois and two elderly ladies, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Coudrai and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Ronceret, was the object of suppressed curiosity. Several women came up on the pretext of watching the game, and gave him such odd, albeit furtive, glances that the old bachelor at last began to think that there must be something amiss with his appearance.</p>
			<p>“Can it be that my toupet is askew?” he asked himself. And he felt that all-absorbing uneasiness to which the elderly bachelor is peculiarly subject. A blunder gave him an excuse for leaving the table at the end of the seventh rubber.</p>
			<p>“I cannot touch a card but I lose,” he said; “I am decidedly too unlucky at cards.”</p>
			<p>“You are lucky in other respects,” said the Chevalier, with a knowing look. Naturally, the joke made the round of the room, and everyone exclaimed over the exquisite breeding shown by the Prince Talleyrand of Alençon.</p>
			<p>“There is no one like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois for saying such things,” said the niece of the curé of <abbr>St.</abbr> Léonard’s.</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier went up to the narrow mirror above “The Deserter,” but he could detect nothing unusual.</p>
			<p>Towards ten o’clock, after innumerable repetitions of the same phrase with every possible variation, the long antechamber began to fill with visitors preparing to embark; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon convoying a few favored guests as far as the perron for a farewell embrace. Knots of guests took their departure, some in the direction of the Brittany road and the château, and others turning toward the quarter by the Sarthe. And then began the exchange of remarks with which the streets had echoed at the same hour for a score of years. There was the inevitable, “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon looked very well this evening.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon? She looked strange, I thought.”</p>
			<p>“How the Abbé stoops, poor man! And how he goes to sleep⁠—did you see? He never knows where the cards are now; his mind wanders.”</p>
			<p>“We shall be very sorry to lose him.”</p>
			<p>“It is a fine night. We shall have a fine day tomorrow.”</p>
			<p>“Fine weather for the apples to set.”</p>
			<p>“You beat us tonight; you always do when <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois is your partner.”</p>
			<p>“Then how much did he win?”</p>
			<p>“Tonight? Why, he won three or four francs. He never loses.”</p>
			<p>“Faith, no. There are three hundred and sixty-five days in the year, you know; at that rate, whist is as good as a farm for him.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! what bad luck we had tonight!”</p>
			<p>“You are very fortunate, monsieur and madame, here you are at your own doorstep, while we have half the town to cross.”</p>
			<p>“I do not pity you; you could keep a carriage if you liked, you need not go afoot.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! monsieur, we have a daughter to marry (that means one wheel), and a son to keep in Paris, and that takes the other.”</p>
			<p>“Are you still determined to make a magistrate of him?”</p>
			<p>“What can one do? You must do something with a boy, and besides, it is no disgrace to serve the King.”</p>
			<p>Sometimes a discussion on cider or flax was continued on the way, the very same things being said at the same season year after year. If any observer of human nature had lived in that particular street, their conversation would have supplied him with an almanac. At this moment, however, the talk was of a decidedly Rabelaisian turn; for du Bousquier, walking on ahead by himself, was humming the well-known tune “<span epub:type="se:name.music.song" xml:lang="fr">Femme sensible, entends-tu le ramage</span>?” without a suspicion of its appropriateness. Some of the party held that du Bousquier was uncommonly long-headed, and that people judged him unjustly. President du Ronceret inclined toward this view since he had been confirmed in his post by a new royal decree. The rest regarded the forage-contractor as a dangerous man of lax morals, of whom anything might be expected. In the provinces, as in Paris, public men are very much in the position of the statue in Addison’s ingenious fable. The statue was erected at a place where four roads met; two cavaliers coming up on opposite sides declared, the one that it M-as white, the other that it was black, until they came to blows, and both of them lying on the ground discovered that it was black on one side and white on the other, while a third cavalier coming up to their assistance affirmed that it was red.</p>
			<p>When the Chevalier de Valois reached home, he said to himself: “It is time to spread a report that I am going to marry <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon. The news shall come from the d’Esgrignon’s salon; it shall go straight to the Bishop’s palace at Séez and come back through one of the vicars-general to the curé of <abbr>St.</abbr> Léonard’s. He will not fail to tell the Abbé Couturier, and in this way <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon will receive the shot well under the waterline. The old Marquis d’Esgrignon is sure to ask the Abbé de Sponde to dinner to put a stop to gossip which might injure <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon if I fail to come forward; or me, if she refuses me. The Abbé shall be well and duly entangled; and after a call from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> de Gordes, in the course of which the grandeur and the prospects of the alliance will be put before <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, she is not likely to hold out. The Abbé will leave her more than a hundred thousand crowns; and as for her, she must have put by more than a hundred thousand livres by this time; she has her house, the Prébaudet, and some fifteen thousand livres per annum. One word to my friend the Comte de Fontaine, and I am Mayor of Alençon, and deputy; then, once seated on the right-hand benches, the way to a peerage is cleared by a well-timed cry of ‘Cloture,’ or ‘Order.’ ”</p>
			<p>When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson reached home, she had a warm explanation with her son. He could not be made to understand the connection between his political opinions and his love. It was the first quarrel which had troubled the peace of the poor little household.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Next morning, at nine o’clock, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, packed into the cariole with Josette by her side, drove up the Rue Saint-Blaise on her way to the Prébaudet, looking like a pyramid above an ocean of packages. And the event which was to surprise her there and hasten on her marriage was unseen as yet by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, or du Bousquier, or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois, or by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon herself. Chance is the greatest artist of all.</p>
			<p>On the morrow of mademoiselle’s arrival at the Prébaudet, she was very harmlessly engaged in taking her eight o’clock breakfast, while she listened to the reports of her bailiff and gardener, when Jacquelin, in a great flurry, burst into the dining-room.</p>
			<p>“Mademoiselle,” cried he, “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> l’Abbé has sent an express messenger to you; that boy of Mother Grosmort’s has come with a letter. The lad left Alençon before daybreak, and yet here he is! He came almost as fast as Penelope. Ought he to have a glass of wine?”</p>
			<p>“What can have happened, Josette? Can uncle be⁠—”</p>
			<p>“He would not have written if he was,” said the woman, guessing her mistress’ fears.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon glanced over the first few lines.</p>
			<p>“Quick! quick!” she cried. “Tell Jacquelin to put Penelope in.⁠—Get ready, child, have everything packed in half an hour, we are going back to town,” she added, turning to Josette.</p>
			<p>“Jacquelin!” called Josette, excited by the expression of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s face. Jacquelin on receiving his orders came back to the house to expostulate.</p>
			<p>“But, mademoiselle, Penelope has only just been fed.”</p>
			<p>“Eh! what does that matter to me? I want to start this moment,”</p>
			<p>“But, mademoiselle, it is going to rain.”</p>
			<p>“Very well. We shall be wet through,”</p>
			<p>“The house is on fire,” muttered Josette, vexed because her mistress said nothing, but read her letter through to the end, and then began again at the beginning.</p>
			<p>“Just finish your coffee at any rate. Don’t upset yourself! See how red you are in the face.”</p>
			<p>“Red in the face, Josette!” exclaimed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, going up to the mirror; and as the quick-silvered sheet had come away from the glass, she beheld her countenance doubly distorted. “Oh, dear!” she thought, “I shall look ugly!⁠—Come, come, Josette, child, help me to dress. I want to be ready before Jacquelin puts Penelope in. If you cannot put all the things into the chaise, I would rather leave them here than lose a minute.”</p>
			<p>If you have fully comprehended the degree of monomania to which <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon had been driven by her desire to marry, you will share her excitement. Her worthy uncle informed her that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville, a retired soldier from the Russian service, the grandson of one of his best friends, wishing to settle down in Alençon, had asked for his hospitality for the sake of the Abbé’s old friendship with the mayor, his grandfather, the Vicomte de Troisville of the reign of Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Sponde, in alarm, begged his niece to come home at once to help him to entertain the guest and to do the honors of the house; for as there had been some delay in forwarding the letter, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville might be expected to drop in upon him that very evening.</p>
			<p>How was it possible after reading that letter to give any attention to affairs at the Prébaudet? The tenant and the bailiff, beholding their mistress’ dismay, lay low and waited for orders. When they stopped her passage to ask for instructions. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, the despotic old maid, who saw to everything herself at the Prébaudet, answered them with an “As you please,” which struck them dumb with amazement. This was the mistress who carried administrative zeal to such lengths that she counted the fruit and entered it under headings, so that she could regulate the consumption by the quantity of each sort!</p>
			<p>“I must be dreaming, I think,” said Josette, when she saw her mistress flying upstairs like some elephant on which God should have bestowed wings.</p>
			<p>In a little while, in spite of the pelting rain, mademoiselle was driving away from the Prébaudet, leaving her people to have things all their own way. Jacquelin dared not take it upon himself to drive the placid Penelope any faster than her usual jog-trot pace; and the old mare, something like the fair queen after whom she was named, seemed to take a step back for every step forward. Beholding this, mademoiselle bade Jacquelin, in a vinegar voice, to urge the poor astonished beast to a gallop, and to use the whip if necessary, so appalling was the thought that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville might arrive before the house was ready for him. A grandson of an old friend of her uncle’s could not be much over forty, she thought; a military man must infallibly be a bachelor. She vowed inwardly that, with her uncle’s help, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville should not depart in the estate in which he entered the Maison Cormon. Penelope galloped; but mademoiselle, absorbed in dresses and dreams of a wedding night, told Jacquelin again and again that he was standing still. She fidgeted in her seat, without vouchsafing any answer to Josette’s questions, and talked to herself as if she were resolving mighty matters in her mind.</p>
			<p>At last the cariole turned into the long street of Alençon, known as the Rue Saint-Blaise if you come in on the side of Mortagne, the Rue de la Porte de Séez by the time you reach the sign of the Three Moors, and lastly as the Rue du Bercail, when it finally debouches into the highroad into Brittany. If <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s departure for the Prébaudet made a great noise in Alençon, anybody can imagine the hubbub caused by her return on the following day, with the driving rain lashing her face. Everybody remarked Penelope’s furious pace, Jacquelin’s sly looks, the earliness of the hour, the bundles piled up topsy-turvy, the lively conversation between mistress and maid, and, more than all things, the impatience of the party.</p>
			<p>The Troisville estates lay between Alençon and Mortagne. Josette, therefore, knew about the different branches of the family. A word let fall by her mistress just as they reached the pavé of Alençon put Josette in possession of the facts, and a discussion sprang up, in the course of which the two women settled between themselves that the expected guest must be a man of forty or forty-two, a bachelor, neither rich nor poor. Mademoiselle saw herself Vicomtesse de Troisville.</p>
			<p>“And here is uncle telling me nothing, knowing nothing, and wanting to know nothing! Oh, so like uncle! He would forget his nose if it was not fastened to his face.”</p>
			<p>Have you not noticed how mature spinsters, under these circumstances, grow as intelligent, fierce, bold, and full of promises as a Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>? To them, as to clerics in liquor, nothing is sacred.</p>
			<p>In one moment, from the upper end of the Rue Saint-Blaise to the Porte de Séez, the town of Alençon heard of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s return with aggravating circumstances, heard with a mighty perturbation of its vitals and trouble of the organs of life public and domestic. Cook-maids, shopkeepers, and passersby carried the news from door to door; then, without delay, it circulated in the upper spheres, and almost simultaneously the words, “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon has come back,” exploded like a bomb in every house.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile Jacquelin climbed down from his wooden bench in front, polished by some process unknown to cabinetmakers, and with his own hands opened the great gates with the rounded tops. They were closed in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s absence as a sign of mourning: for when she went away her house was shut up, and the faithful took it in turn to show hospitality to the Abbé de Sponde. (<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois used to pay his debt by an invitation to dine at the Marquis d’Esgrignon’s.) Jacquelin gave the familiar call to Penelope standing in the middle of the road; and the animal, accustomed to this manoeuvre, turned into the courtyard, steering clear of the flowerbed, till Jacquelin took the bridle and walked round with the chaise to the steps before the door.</p>
			<p>“Mariette!” called <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon.</p>
			<p>“Mademoiselle?” returned Mariette, engaged in shutting the gates.</p>
			<p>“Has the gentleman come?”</p>
			<p>“No, mademoiselle.”</p>
			<p>“And is my uncle here?”</p>
			<p>“He is at the church, mademoiselle.”</p>
			<p>Jacquelin and Josette were standing on the lowest step of the flight, holding out their hands to steady their mistress’ descent from the cariole; she, meanwhile, had hoisted herself upon the shaft, and was clutching at the curtains, before springing down into their arms. It was two years since she had dared to trust herself upon the iron step of double strength, secured to the shaft by a fearfully made contrivance with huge bolts.</p>
			<p>From the height of the steps, mademoiselle surveyed her courtyard with an air of satisfaction.</p>
			<p>“There, there, Mariette, let the great gate alone and come here.”</p>
			<p>“There is something up,” Jacquelin said to Mariette as she came past the chaise.</p>
			<p>“Let us see now, child, what is there in the house?” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, collapsing on the bench in the long antechamber as if she were exhausted.</p>
			<p>“Just nothing at all,” replied Mariette, hands on hips. “Mademoiselle knows quite well that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> l’Abbé always dines out when she is not at home; yesterday I went to bring him back from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande’s.”</p>
			<p>“Then where is he?”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> l’Abbé? He is gone to church; he will not be back’ till three o’clock.”</p>
			<p>“Uncle thinks of nothing! Why couldn’t he have sent you to market? Go down now, Mariette, and, without throwing money away, spare for nothing, get the best, finest, and daintiest of everything. Go to the coach office and ask where people send orders for pates. And I want crayfish from the brooks along the Brillante. What time is it?”</p>
			<p>“Nine o’clock all but a quarter.”</p>
			<p>“Oh dear, oh dear; don’t lose any time in chattering, Mariette. The visitor my uncle is expecting may come at any moment; pretty figures we should cut if he comes to breakfast.”</p>
			<p>Mariette, turning round, saw Penelope in a lather, and gave Jacquelin a glance which said, “Mademoiselle means to put her hand on a husband this time.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon turned to her housemaid. “Now, it is our turn, Josette; we must make arrangements for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville to sleep here tonight.”</p>
			<p>How gladly those words were uttered! “We must arrange for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville” (pronounced Tréville) “to sleep here tonight!” How much lay in those few words! Hope poured like a flood through the old maid’s soul.</p>
			<p>“Will you put him in the green chamber?”</p>
			<p>“The Bishop’s room? No,” said mademoiselle, “it is too near mine. It is very well for his Lordship, a holy man.”</p>
			<p>“Give him your uncle’s room.”</p>
			<p>“It looks so bare; it would not do.”</p>
			<p>“Lord, mademoiselle, you could have a bed put up in the boudoir in a brace of shakes; there is a fireplace there. Moreau will be sure to find a bedstead in his warehouse that will match the hangings as nearly as possible.”</p>
			<p>“You are right, Josette. Very well; run round to Moreau’s and ask his advice about everything necessary; I give you authority. If the bed, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville’s bed, can be set up by this evening, so that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville shall notice nothing, supposing that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville should happen to come in while Moreau is here, I am quite willing. If Moreau cam not promise that, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville shall sleep in the green chamber, although <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville will be very near me.”</p>
			<p>Josette departed; her mistress called her back.</p>
			<p>“Tell Jacquelin all about it,” she exclaimed in a stern and awful voice; “let <em>him</em> go to Moreau. How about my dress?</p>
			<p>Suppose <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville came and caught me like this, without uncle here to receive him!⁠—Oh, uncle! uncle!⁠—Come Josette, you shall help me to dress.”</p>
			<p>“But how about Penelope?” the woman began imprudently. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s eyes shot sparks for the first and last time in her life.</p>
			<p>“It is always Penelope! Penelope this, Penelope that! Is Penelope mistress here?”</p>
			<p>“She is all of a lather, and she has not been fed.”</p>
			<p>“Eh! and if she dies, let her die!⁠—” cried <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon⁠—“so long as I am married,” she added in her own mind.</p>
			<p>Josette stood stockstill a moment in amazement, such a remark was tantamount to murder; then, at a sign from her mistress, she dashed headlong down the steps into the yard.</p>
			<p>“Mademoiselle is possessed, Jacquelin!” were Josette’s first words.</p>
			<p>And in this way, everything that occurred throughout the day led up to the great climax which was to change the whole course of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s life. The town was already turned upside down by five aggravating circumstances which attended the lady’s sudden return, to wit⁠—the pouring rain; Penelope’s panting pace and sunk flanks covered with foam; the earliness of the hour; the untidy bundles; and the spinster’s strange, sacred looks. But when Mariette invaded the market to carry off everything that she could lay her hands on; when Jacquelin went to inquire for a bedstead of the principal upholsterer in the Rue Porte de Séez, close by the church; here, indeed, was material on which to build the gravest conjecture! The strange event was discussed on the Parade and the Promenade; everyone was full of it, not excepting <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande, on whom the Chevalier de Valois happened to be calling at the time.</p>
			<p>Only two days ago Alençon had been stirred to its depths by occurrences of such capital importance, that worthy matrons were still exclaiming that it was like the end of the world! And now, this last news was summed up in all houses by the inquiry, What can be happening at the Cormons’?”</p>
			<p>The Abbé de Sponde, skilfully questioned when he emerged from <abbr>St.</abbr> Léonard’s to take a walk with the Abbé Couturier along the Parade, made reply in the simplicity of his heart, to the effect that he expected a visit from the Vicomte do Troisville, who had been in the Russian service during the Emigration, and now was coming back to settle in Alençon. A kind of labial telegraph, at work that afternoon between two and five o’clock, informed all the inhabitants of Alençon that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon at last had found herself a husband by advertisement. She was going to marry the Vicomte de Troisville. Some said that “Moreau was at work on a bedstead already.” In some places the bed was six feet long. It was only four feet at <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson’s house in the Rue du Bercail. At President du Ronceret’s, where du Bousquier was dining, it dwindled into a sofa. The tradespeople said that it cost eleven hundred francs. It was generally thought that this was like counting your chickens before they were hatched.</p>
			<p>Further away, it was said that the price of carp had gone up. Mariette had swooped down upon the market and created a general scarcity. Penelope had dropped down at the upper end of the Rue Saint-Blaise; the death was called in question at the receiver-general’s; nevertheless at the prefecture it was known for a fact that the animal fell dead just as she turned in at the gate of the Hôtel Cormon, so swiftly had the old maid come down upon her prey. The saddler at the corner of the Rue de Séez, in his anxiety to know the truth about Penelope, was hardy enough to call in to ask if anything had happened to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s chaise. Then from the utmost end of the Rue Saint-Blaise, to the furthermost parts of the Rue du Bercail, it was known that, thanks to Jacquelin’s care, Penelope, dumb victim of her mistress’ intemperate haste, was still alive, but she seemed to be in a bad way.</p>
			<p>All along the Brittany road the Vicomte de Troisville was a penniless younger son, for the domains of Perche belonged to the Marquis of that ilk, a peer of France with two children.</p>
			<p>The match was a lucky thing for an impoverished émigré; as for the Vicomte himself, that was <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s affair. Altogether the match received the approval of the aristocratic section on the Brittany road; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon could not have put her fortune to a better use.</p>
			<p>Among the bourgeoisie, on the other hand, the Vicomte de Troisville was a Russian general that had borne arms against France. He was bringing back a large fortune made at the court of <abbr>St.</abbr> Petersburg. He was a “foreigner,” one of the “Allies” detested by the Liberals. The Abbé de Sponde had manoeuvred the match on the sly. Every person who had any shadow of a right of entrance to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s drawing-room vowed to be there that night.</p>
			<p>While the excitement went through the town, and all but put Suzanne out of people’s heads. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon herself was not less excited; she felt as she had never felt before. She looked round the drawing-room, the boudoir, the cabinet, the dining-room, and a dreadful apprehension seized upon her. Some mocking demon seemed to show her the old-fashioned splendor in a new light; the beautiful furniture, admired ever since she was a child, was suspected, nay, convicted, of being out of date. She was shaken, in fact, by the dread that catches almost every author by the throat when he begins to read his own work aloud to some exigent or Jaded critic. Before he began, it was perfect in his eyes; now the novel situations are stale; the finest periods turned with such secret relish are turgid or halting; the metaphors are mixed or grotesque; his sins stare him in the face. Even so, poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon shivered to think of the smile on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville’s lips when he looked round that salon, which looked like a Bishop’s drawing-room, unchanged for one possessor after another. She dreaded his cool survey of the ancient dining-room; in short, she was afraid that the picture might look the older for the ancient frame. How if all these old things should tinge her with their age? The bare thought of it made her flesh creep. At that moment she would have given one-fourth of her savings for the power of renovating her house at a stroke of a magic wand. Where is the general so conceited that he will not shudder on the eve of an action? She, poor thing, was between an Austerlitz and a Waterloo.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> la Vicomtesse de Troisville,” she said to herself, “What a fine name! Our estates will pass to a good house, at any rate.”</p>
			<p>Her excitement fretted her. It sent a thrill through every fibre of every nerve to the least of the ramifications and the papillae so well wadded with flesh. Hope tingling in her veins set all the blood in her body in circulation. She felt capable, if need was, of conversing with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville.</p>
			<p>Of the activity with which Josette, Mariette, Jacquelin, Moreau, and his assistants set about their work, it is needless to speak. Ants rescuing their eggs could not have been busier than they. Everything, kept so neat and clean with daily care, was starched and ironed, scrubbed, washed, and polished. The best china saw the light. Linen damask cloths and serviettes docketed A B C D emerged from the depths where they lay shrouded in triple wrappings and defended by bristling rows of pins. The rarest shelves of that oak-bound library were made to give account of their contents; and finally, mademoiselle offered up three bottles of liqueurs to the coming guest, three bottles bearing the label of the most famous distiller of oversea⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Amphoux, name dear to connoisseurs.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was ready for battle, thanks to the devotion of her lieutenants. The munitions of war, the heavy artillery of the kitchen, the batteries of the pantry, the victuals, provisions for the attack, and body of reserves, had all been brought up in array. Orders were issued to Jacquelin, Mariette, and Josette to wear their best clothes. The garden was raked over. Mademoiselle only regretted that she could not come to an understanding with the nightingales in the trees, thai they might warble their sweetest songs for the occasion. At length, at four o’clock, just as the Abbé came in, and mademoiselle was beginning to think that she had brought out her daintiest linen and china and made ready the most exquisite of dinners in vain, the crack of a postilion’s whip sounded outside in the Val-Noble.</p>
			<p>“It is <em>he</em>!” she thought, and the lash of the whip struck her in the heart.</p>
			<p>And indeed, heralded by all this tittle-tattle, a certain post-chaise, with a single gentleman inside it, had made such a prodigious sensation as it drove down the Rue Saint-Blaise and turned into the Rue du Cours, that several small urchins and older persons gave chase to the vehicle, and now were standing in a group about the gateway of the Hôtel Cormon to watch the postilion drive in. Jacquelin, feeling that his own marriage was in the wind, had also heard the crack of the whip, and was out in the yard to throw open the gates. The postilion (an acquaintance) was on his mettle, he turned the corner to admiration, and came to a stand before the flight of steps. And, as you can understand, he did not go until Jacquelin had duly and properly made him tipsy.</p>
			<p>The Abbé came out to meet his guest, and in a trice the chaise was despoiled of its occupant, robbers in a hurry could not have done their work more nimbly; then the chaise was put into the coach-house, the great door was closed, and in a few minutes there was not a sign of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville’s arrival. Never did two chemicals combine with a greater alacrity than that displayed by the house of Cormon to absorb the Vicomte de Troisville. As for mademoiselle, if she had been a lizard caught by a shepherd, her heart could not have beat faster. She sat heroically in her low chair by the fireside; Josette threw open the door, and the Vicomte de Troisville, followed by the Abbé de Sponde, appeared before her.</p>
			<p>“This is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Vicomte de Troisville, niece, a grandson of an old schoolfellow of mine.⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville, my niece, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon.”</p>
			<p>“Dear uncle, how nicely he puts it,” thought Rose Marie Victoire.</p>
			<p>The Vicomte de Troisville, to describe him in a few words, was a du Bousquier of noble family. Between the two men there was just that difference which separates the gentleman from the ordinary man. If they had been standing side by side, even the most furious Radical could not have denied the signs of race about the Vicomte. There was all the distinction of refinement about his strength, his figure had lost nothing of its magnificent dignity. Blue-eyed, dark-haired, and olive-skinned, he could not have been more than six-and-forty. You might have thought him a handsome Spaniard preserved in Russian ice. His manner, gait, and bearing, and everything about him, suggested a diplomate, and a diplomate that has seen Europe. He looked like a gentleman in his traveling dress.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville seemed to be tired. The Abbé rose to conduct him to his room, and was overcome with astonishment when Rose opened the door of the boudoir, now transformed into a bedroom. Then uncle and niece left the noble visitor leisure to attend to his toilet with the help of Jacquelin, who brought him all the luggage which be needed. While <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville was dressing, they walked on the terrace by the Brillante. The Abbé, by a strange chance, was more absentminded than usual, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon no less preoccupied, so they paced to and fro in silence. Never in her life had <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon seen so attractive a man as this Olympian Vicomte. She could not say to herself, like a German girl, “I have found my Ideal!” but she felt that she was in love from head to foot. “The very thing for me,” she thought. On a sudden she fled to Mariette, to know whether dinner could be put back a little without serious injury.</p>
			<p>“Uncle, this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville is very pleasant,” she said when she came back again.</p>
			<p>“Why, my girl, he has not said a word as yet,” returned the Abbé, laughing.</p>
			<p>“But one can tell by his general appearance. Is he a bachelor?”</p>
			<p>“I know nothing about it,” replied her uncle, his thoughts full of that afternoon’s discussion with the Abbé Couturier on Divine Grace. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville said in his letter that he wanted to buy a house here.⁠—If he were married, he would not have come alone,” he added carelessly. It never entered his head that his niece could think of marriage for herself.</p>
			<p>“Is he rich?”</p>
			<p>“He is the younger son of a younger branch. His grandfather held a major’s commission, but this young man’s father made a foolish marriage.”</p>
			<p>“Young man!” repeated his niece. “Why, he is quite five-and-forty, uncle, it seems to me.” She felt an uncontrollable desire to compare his age with hers.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said the Abbé. “But to a poor priest at seventy a man of forty seems young, Rose.”</p>
			<p>By this time all Alençon knew that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Vicomte de Troisville had arrived at the Hôtel Cormon.</p>
			<p>The visitor very soon rejoined his host and hostess, and began to admire the view of the Brillante, the garden, and the house.</p>
			<p>“Monsieur l’Abbé,” he said, “to find such a place as this would be the height of my ambition.”</p>
			<p>The old maid wished to read a declaration in the speech. She lowered her eyes.</p>
			<p>“You must be very fond of it, mademoiselle,” continued the Vicomte.</p>
			<p>“How could I help being fond of it? It has been in our family since 1574, when one of our ancestors, an Intendant of the Duchy of Alençon, bought the ground and built the house. It is laid on piles.”</p>
			<p>Jacquelin having announced that dinner was ready, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville offered his arm. The radiant spinster tried not to lean too heavily upon him; she was still afraid that he might, think her forward.</p>
			<p>“Everything is quite in harmony here,” remarked the Vicomte as they sat down to table.</p>
			<p>“Yes, the trees in our garden are full of birds that give us music for nothing. Nobody molests them; the nightingales sing there every night,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon.</p>
			<p>“I am speaking of the inside of the house,” remarked the Vicomte; he had not troubled himself to study his hostess particularly, and was quite unaware of her vacuity.⁠—“Yes, everything contributes to the general effect; the tones of color, the furniture, the character of the house,” added he, addressing <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon.</p>
			<p>“It costs a great deal, though,” replied that excellent spinster, “the rates are something enormous.” The word “contribute” had impressed itself on her mind.</p>
			<p>“Ah! then are the rates high here?” asked the Vicomte, too full of his own ideas to notice the absurd non sequitur.</p>
			<p>“I do not know,” said the Abbé. “My niece manages her own property and mine.”</p>
			<p>“The rates are a mere trifle if people are well-to-do,” struck in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, anxious not to appear stingy. “As to the furniture, I leave things as they are. I shall never make any changes here; at least I shall not, unless I marry, and in that case everything in the house must be arranged to suit the master’s taste.”</p>
			<p>“You are for great principles, mademoiselle,” smiled the Vicomte; “somebody will be a lucky man.”</p>
			<p>“Nobody ever made me such a pretty speech before,” thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon.</p>
			<p>The Vicomte complimented his hostess upon the appointments of the table and the housekeeping, admitting that he thought that the provinces were behind the times, and found himself in most delectable quarters.</p>
			<p>“<em>Delectable</em>, good Lord! what does it mean?” thought she. “Where is the Chevalier de Valois to reply to him? Delectable? Is it made up of several words? There! courage; perhaps it is Russian, and if so I am not obliged to say anything.”⁠—Then she added aloud, her tongue unloosed by an eloquence which almost every human creature can find in a great crisis⁠—“We have the most brilliant society here. Monsieur le Vicomte. You will be able to judge for yourself, for it assembles in this very house; on some of our acquaintances we can always count; they will have heard of my return no doubt, and will be sure to come to see me. There is the Chevalier de Valois, a gentleman of the old court, a mar; of infinite wit and taste; then there is <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Marquis d’Esgrignon and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande, his sister”⁠—she bit her lip and changed her mind⁠—“a⁠—a remarkable woman in her way. She refused all offers of marriage so as to leave her fortune to her brother and his son.”</p>
			<p>“Ah! yes; the d’Esgrignons, I remember them,” said the Vicomte.</p>
			<p>“Alençon is very gay,” pursued mademoiselle, now that she had fairly started off. “There is so much going on; the Receiver-General gives dances; the Prefect is a very pleasant man; his lordship the Bishop occasionally honors us with a visit⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Come!” said the Vicomte, smiling as he spoke, “I have done well, it seems, to come creeping back like a hare (<i xml:lang="fr">un lièvre</i>) to die in my form.”</p>
			<p>“It is the same with me,” replied mademoiselle; “I am like a creeper (<i xml:lang="fr">le lierre</i>), I must cling to something or die.”</p>
			<p>The Vicomte took the saying thus twisted for a joke, and smiled.</p>
			<p>“Ah!” thought his hostess, “that is all right, he understands me.”</p>
			<p>The conversation was kept up upon generalities. Under pressure of a strong desire to please, the strange, mysterious, indefinable workings of consciousness brought all the Chevalier de Valois’ tricks of speech uppermost in <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s brain. It fell out, as it sometimes does in a duel, when the Devil himself seems to take aim; and never did duelist hit his man more fairly and squarely than the old maid. The Vicomte de Troisville was too well mannered to praise the excellent dinner, but his silence was panegyric in itself! As he drank the delicious wines with which Jacquelin plied him, he seemed to be meeting old friends with the liveliest pleasure; for your true amateur does not applaud, he enjoys. He informed himself curiously of the prices of land, houses, and sites; he drew from mademoiselle a long description of the property between the Brillante and the Sarthe. He was amazed that the town and the river lay so far apart, and showed the greatest interest in local topography. The Abbé sat silent, leaving all the conversation to his niece. And, in truth, mademoiselle considered that she interested <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville; he smiled graciously at her, he made far more progress with her in the course of a single dinner than the most ardent of her former wooers in a whole fortnight. For which reasons, you may be certain that never was guest so cosseted, so lapped about with small attentions and observances. He might have been a much loved lover, new come home to the house of which he was the delight.</p>
			<p>Mademoiselle forestalled his wants. She saw when he needed bread, her eyes brooded over him; if he turned his head, she adroitly supplemented his portion of any dish which he seemed to like; if he had been a glutton, she would have killed him. What a delicious earnest of all that she counted upon doing for her lover! She made no silly blunders of self-depreciation this time! She went gallantly forward, full sail, and all flags flying; posed as the queen of Alençon, and vaunted her preserves. Indeed, she fished for compliments, talking about herself as if her trumpeter were dead. And she saw that she pleased the Vicomte, for her wish to please had so transformed her, that she grew almost feminine. It was not without inward exultation that she heard footsteps while they sat at dessert; sounds of going and coming in the antechamber and noises in the salon; and knew that the usual company was arriving. She called the attention of her uncle and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville to this fact as a proof of the affection in which she was held, whereas it really was a symptom of the paroxysm of curiosity which convulsed the whole town. Impatient to show herself in her glory, she ordered coffee and the liqueurs to be taken to the salon, whither Jacquelin went to display to the elite of Alençon the splendors of a Dresden china service, which only left the cupboard twice in a twelvemonth. All these circumstances were noted by people disposed to criticise under their breath.</p>
			<p>“Egad!” cried du Bousquier, “nothing but <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Amphoux’s liqueurs, which only come out on the four great festival days!”</p>
			<p>“Decidedly, this match must have been arranged by correspondence for a year past,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Président du Ronceret. “The postmaster here has been receiving letters with an Odessa postmark for the last twelve months.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson shuddered. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Chevalier de Valois had eaten a heavy dinner, but he felt the pallor spreading over his left cheek; felt, too, that he was betraying his secret, and said, “It is cold today, do you not think? I am freezing.”</p>
			<p>“It is the neighborhood of Prussia,” suggested du Bousquier. And the Chevalier looked at his rival as who should say, “Well put in!”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was so radiant, so triumphant, that she looked positively handsome, it was thought. Nor was this unwonted brilliancy wholly due to sentiment; ever since the morning the blood had been surging through her veins; the presentiments of a great crisis at hand affected her nerves. It needed a combination of circumstances to make her so little like herself. With what joy did she not solemnly introduce the Vicomte to the Chevalier, and the Chevalier to the Vicomte; all Alençon was presented to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville made the acquaintance of all Alençon. It fell out, naturally enough, that the Vicomte and the Chevalier, two born aristocrats, were in sympathy at once; they recognized each other for inhabitants of the same social sphere. They began to chat as they stood by the fire. A circle formed about them listening devoutly to their conversation, though it was carried on sotto voce. Fully to realize the scene, imagine <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon standing with her back to the chimneypiece, busy preparing coffee for her supposed suitor.</p>
			<p><b><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois</b>. “So <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> le Vicomte is coming to settle here, people say.”</p>
			<p><b><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville</b>. “Yes, monsieur. I have come to look for a house.” (<i><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon turns, cup in hand.</i>) “And I must have a large one”⁠—(<i><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon offers the cup of coffee</i>) “to hold my family.” (<i>The room grows dark before the old maid’s eyes.</i>)</p>
			<p><b><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois</b>. “Are you married?”</p>
			<p><b><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville</b>. “Yes, I have been married for sixteen years. My wife is the daughter of the Princess Scherbelloff.”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon dropped like one thunderstruck. Du Bousquier, seeing her reel, sprang forward, and caught her in his arms. Somebody opened the door to let him pass out with his enormous burden. The mettled Republican, counseled by Josette, summoned up his strength, bore the old maid to her room, and deposited her upon the bed. Josette, armed with a pair of scissors, cut the stay-laces, drawn outrageously tight. Du Bousquier, rough and ready, dashed cold water over <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s face and the bust, which broke from its bounds like Loire in flood. The patient opened her eye’s, saw du Bousquier, and gave a cry of alarmed modesty. Du Bousquier withdrew, leaving half-a-dozen women in possession, with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson at their head, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson beaming with joy.</p>
			<p>What had the Chevalier de Valois done? True to his system, he had been covering the retreat.</p>
			<p>“Poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon!” he said, addressing <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville, but looking round the room, quelling the beginnings of an outbreak of laughter with his haughty eyes. “She is dreadfully troubled with heated blood. She would not be bled before going to the Prébaudet (her country house), and this is the result of the spring weather.”</p>
			<p>“She drove over in the rain this morning,” said the Abbé de Sponde. “She may have taken a little cold, and so caused the slight derangement of the system to which she is subject. But she will soon get over it.”</p>
			<p>“She was telling me the day before yesterday that she had not had a recurrence of it for three months; she added at the time that it was sure to play her a bad turn,” added the Chevalier.</p>
			<p>“Ah! so you are married!” thought Jacquelin, watching <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville, who was sipping his coffee.</p>
			<p>The faithful manservant made his mistress’ disappointment his own. He guessed her feelings. He took away the liqueurs brought out for a bachelor, and not for a Russian woman’s husband. All these little things were noticed with amusement.</p>
			<p>The Abbé de Sponde had known all along why <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville had come to Alençon, but in his absentmindedness he had said nothing about it; it had never entered his mind that his niece could take the slightest interest in that gentleman. As for the Vicomte, he was engrossed by the object of his journey; like many other married men, he was in no great hurry to introduce his wife into the conversation; he had had no opportunity of saying that he was married; and besides, he thought that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon knew his history. Du Bousquier reappeared, and was questioned without mercy. One of the six women came down, and reported that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was feeling much better, and that her doctor had come; but she was to stay in bed, and it appeared that she ought to be bled at once. The salon soon filled. In <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s absence, the ladies were free to discuss the tragicomic scene which had just taken place; and duly they enlarged, annotated, embellished, colored, adorned, embroidered, and bedizened the tale which was to set all Alençon thinking of the old maid on the morrow.</p>
			<p>Meanwhile, Josette upstairs was saying to her mistress, “That good <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier! How he carried you upstairs! What a fist! Really, your illness made him quite pale. He loves you still.”</p>
			<p>And with this final phrase, the solemn and terrible day came to a close.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>Next day all morning long, the news of the comedy, with full details, circulated over Alençon, raising laughter everywhere, to the shame of the town be it said. Next day, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, very much the better for the bloodletting, would have seemed sublime to the most hardened of those who jeered at her, if they could but have seen her noble dignity and the</p>
			<p>Christian resignation in her soul, as she gave her hand to the unconscious perpetrator of the hoax, and went in to breakfast. Ah! heartless wags, who were laughing at her expense, why could you not hear her say to the Vicomte:</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> de Troisville will have some difficulty in finding a house to suit her. Do me the favor of using my house, monsieur, until you have made all your arrangements.”</p>
			<p>“But I have two girls and two boys, mademoiselle. We should put you to a great deal of inconvenience.”</p>
			<p>“Do not refuse me,” said she, her eyes full of apprehension and regret.</p>
			<p>“I made the offer, however you might decide, in my letter; but you did not take it,” remarked the Abbé.</p>
			<p>“What, uncle! did you know?⁠—”</p>
			<p>Poor thing, she broke off. Josette heaved a sigh, and neither <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville nor the uncle noticed anything.</p>
			<p>After breakfast, the Abbé de Sponde, carrying out the plan agreed upon over night, took the Vicomte to see houses for sale and suitable sites for building. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was left alone in the salon.</p>
			<p>“I am the talk of the town, child, by this time,” she said, looking piteously at Josette.</p>
			<p>“Well, mademoiselle, get married.”</p>
			<p>“But, my girl, I am not at all prepared to make a choice.”</p>
			<p>“Bah! I should take <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier if I were you.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois says that he is such a Republican, Josette.”</p>
			<p>“Your gentlemen don’t know what they are talking about; they say that he robbed the Republic, so he can’t have been at all fond of it,” said Josette, and with that she went.</p>
			<p>“That girl is amazingly shrewd,” thought <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, left alone to her gnawing perplexity.</p>
			<p>She saw that the only way of silencing talk was to marry at once. This last so patently humiliating check was enough to drive her to extreme measures; and it takes a great deal to force a feebleminded human being out of a groove, be it good or bad. Both the old bachelors understood the position of affairs, both made up their minds to call in the morning to make inquiries, and (in their own language) to press the point.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois considered that the occasion demanded a scrupulous toilet; he took a bath, he groomed himself with unusual care, and for the first time and the last Césarine saw him applying “a suspicion of rouge” with incredible skill.</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier, rough and ready Republican that he was, inspired by dogged purpose, paid no attention to his appearance, he hurried round, and came in first. The fate of men, like the destinies of empires, hangs on small things. History records all such principal causes of great failure or success⁠—a Kellermann’s charge at Marengo, a Blücher coming up at the battle of Waterloo, a Prince Eugène slighted by Louis <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>, a curé on the battlefield of Denain; but nobody profits by the lesson to be diligently attentive to the little trifles of his own life. Behold the results.⁠—The Duchesse de Langeais in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L’Histoire des Treize</i> entering a convent for want of ten minutes’ patience; Judge Popinot in <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book" xml:lang="fr">L’Interdiction</i> putting off his inquiries as to the Marquis d’Espard till tomorrow; Charles Grandet coming home by way of Bordeaux instead of Nantes⁠—and these things are said to happen by accident and mere chance! The few moments spent in putting on that suspicion of rouge wrecked <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois’ hopes. Only in such a way could the Chevalier have succumbed. He had lived for the Graces, he was foredoomed to die through them. Even as he gave a last look in the mirror, the burly du Bousquier was entering the disconsolate old maid’s drawing-room. His entrance coincided with a gleam of favor in the lady’s mind, though in the course of her deliberations the Chevalier had decidedly had the advantage.</p>
			<p>“It is God’s will,” she said to herself when du Bousquier appeared.</p>
			<p>“Mademoiselle, I trust you will not take my importunity in bad part; I did not like to trust that great stupid of a René to make inquiries, and came myself.”</p>
			<p>“I am perfectly well,” she said nervously; then, after a pause, and in a very emphatic tone, “Thank you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier, for the trouble that you took and that I gave you yesterday⁠—”</p>
			<p>She recollected how she had lain in du Bousquier’s arms, and the accident seemed to her, to be a direct order from heaven. For the first time in her life a man had seen her with her belt wrenched apart, her stay-laces cut, the jewel shaken violently out of its case.</p>
			<p>“I was so heartily glad to carry you, that I thought you a light weight,” said he.</p>
			<p>At this <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon looked at du Bousquier as she never looked at any man in the world before; and thus encouraged, the ex-contractor for forage flung a side glance that went straight to the old maid’s heart.</p>
			<p>“It is a pity,” added he, “that this has not given me the right to keep you always.” (She was listening with rapture in her face.) “You looked dazzling as you lay swooning there on the bed; I never saw such a fine woman in my life, and I have seen a good many.⁠—There is this about a stout woman, she is superb to look at, she has only to show herself, she triumphs.”</p>
			<p>“You mean to laugh at me,” said the old maid; “that is not kind of you, when the whole town is perhaps putting a bad construction on things that happened yesterday.”</p>
			<p>“It is as true as that my name is du Bousquier, mademoiselle. My feelings towards you have never changed; your first rejection did not discourage me.”</p>
			<p>The old maid lowered her eyes. There was a pause, a painful ordeal for du Bousquier. Then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon made up her mind and raised her eyelids; she looked up tenderly at du Bousquier through her tears.</p>
			<p>“If this is so, monsieur,” she said, in a tremulous voice, “I only ask you to allow me to lead a Christian life, do not ask me to change any of my habits as to religion, leave me free to choose my directors, and I will give you my hand,” holding it out to him as she spoke.</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier caught the plump, honest hand that held so many francs, and kissed it respectfully.</p>
			<p>“But I have one thing more to ask,” added <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, suffering him to kiss her hand.</p>
			<p>“It is granted, and if it is impossible, it shall be done” (a reminiscence of Beaujon).</p>
			<p>“Alas!” began the old maid, “for love of me you must burden your soul with a sin which I know is heinous; falsehood is one of the seven deadly sins; but still you can make a confession, can you not? We will both of us do penance.” They looked tenderly at each other at those words.</p>
			<p>“Perhaps,” continued <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, “after all, it is one of those deceptions which the Church calls venial⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Is she going to tell me that she is in Suzanne’s plight?” thought du Bousquier. “What luck!⁠—” Aloud he said,</p>
			<p>“Well, mademoiselle?”</p>
			<p>“And you must take it upon you⁠—”</p>
			<p>“What?”</p>
			<p>“To say that this marriage was agreed upon between us six months ago.”</p>
			<p>“ ‘Charming woman!” exclaimed the forage-contractor, and by his manner he implied that he was prepared to make even this sacrifice; “a man only does thus much for the woman he has worshiped for ten years.”</p>
			<p>“In spite of my severity?” asked she.</p>
			<p>“Yes, in spite of your severity.”</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier, I have misjudged you.” Again she held out her big, red hand, and again du Bousquier kissed it.</p>
			<p>At that very moment the door opened, and the betrothed couple, turning their heads, perceived the charming but too tardy Chevalier.</p>
			<p>“Ah! fair queen,” said he, “so you have risen?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon smiled at him, and something clutched at her heart. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois, grown remarkably young and irresistible, looked like Lauzun entering La Grande Mademoiselle’s apartments.</p>
			<p>“Ah! my dear du Bousquier!” he continued, half laughingly, so sure was he of success. “<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville and the Abbé de Sponde are in front of your house, looking it over like a pair of surveyors.”</p>
			<p>“On my word,” said du Bousquier, “if the Vicomte de Troisville wants it, he can have it for forty thousand francs. It is of no use whatever to me.⁠—Always, if mademoiselle has no objection, that must be ascertained first.⁠—Mademoiselle, may I tell?⁠—Yes?⁠—Very well, my dear Chevalier, you shall be the first to hear”⁠—<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon dropped her eyes⁠—“of the honor and the favor that mademoiselle is doing me; I have kept it a secret for more than six months. We are going to be married in a very few days, the contract is drawn up, we shall sign it tomorrow. So, you see, that I have no further use for my house in the Rue du Cygne. I am quietly on the lookout for a purchaser, and the Abbé de Sponde, <em>who knew this</em>, naturally took <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville to see it.”</p>
			<p>There was such a color of truth about this monstrous fib that the Chevalier was quite taken in by it. My dear Chevalier was a return for all preceding defeats; it was like the victory won at Pultowa by Peter the Great over Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>. And thus du Bousquier enjoyed a delicious revenge for hundreds of pinpricks endured in silence; but in his triumph ho forgot that he was not a young man, he passed his fingers through the false toupet, and⁠—it came off in his hand!</p>
			<p>“I congratulate you both,” said the Chevalier, with an agreeable smile; “I wish that you may end like the fairy stories, ‘They lived very happily and had a fine⁠—<em>family of children!</em>‘” Here he shaped a cone of snuff in his palm before adding mockingly, “But, monsieur, you forgot that⁠—er⁠—you wear borrowed plumes.”</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier reddened. The false toupet was ten inches awry. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon raised her eyes to the face of her betrothed, saw the bare cranium, and bashfully looked down again. Never toad looked more venomously at a victim than du Bousquier at the Chevalier.</p>
			<p>“A pack of aristocrats that look down on me!” he thought. “I will crush you all some of these days.”</p>
			<p>The Chevalier tie Valois imagined that he had regained all the lost ground. But <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was not the woman to understand the connection between the Chevalier’s congratulation and the allusion to the false toupet; and, for that matter, even if she had understood, her hand had been given. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois saw too clearly that all was lost. Meantime, as the two men stood without speaking. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon innocently studied how to amuse them.</p>
			<p>“Play a game of reversis,” suggested she, without any malicious intention.</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier smiled, and went as future master of the house for the card-table. Whether the Chevalier de Valois had lost his head, or whether he chose to remain to study the causes of his defeat and to remedy it, certain it is that he allowed himself to be led like a sheep to the slaughter. But he had just received the heaviest of all bludgeon blows; and a noble might have been excused if he had been at any rate stunned by it. Very soon the worthy Abbé de Sponde and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville returned, and at once <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon hurried into the antechamber, took her uncle aside, and told him in a whisper of her decision. Then, hearing that the house in the Rue du Cygne suited <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville, she begged her betrothed to do her the service of saying that her uncle knew that the place was for sale. She dared not confide the fib to the Abbé, for fear that he should forget. The falsehood was destined to prosper better than if it had been a virtuous action. All Alençon heard the great news that night. For four days the town had found as much to say as in the ominous days of 1814 and 1815. Some laughed at the idea, others thought it true; some condemned, others approved the marriage. The bourgeoisie of Alençon regarded it as a conquest, and they were the best pleased.</p>
			<p>The Chevalier de Valois, next day, among his own circle, brought out this cruel epigram, “The Cormons are ending as they began; stewards and contractors are all on a footing.”</p>
			<p>The news of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s choice wont to poor Athanase’s heart; but he showed not a sign of the dreadful tumult surging within. Ho heard of the marriage at President du Ronceret’s while his mother was playing a game of boston. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, looking up, saw her son’s face in the glass; ho looked white, she thought, but then he had been pale ever since vague rumors had reached him in the morning. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon was the card on which Athanase staked his life, and chill presentiments of impending catastrophe already wrapped him about. When intellect and imagination have exaggerated a calamity till it becomes a burden too heavy for shoulders and brow to bear, when some long-cherished hope fails utterly, and with it the visions which enable a man to forget the fierce vulture cares gnawing at his heart; then, if that man has no belief in himself, in spite of his powers; no belief in the future, in spite of the Power Divine⁠—he is broken in pieces. Athanase was a product of education under the Empire. Fatalism, the Emperor’s creed, spread downwards to the lowest ranks of the army, to the very schoolboys at their desks. Athanase followed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Ronceret’s play with a stolidity which might so easily have been taken for indifference, that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson fancied she had been mistaken as to her son’s feelings.</p>
			<p>Athanase’s apparent carelessness explained his refusal to sacrifice his so-called “Liberal” opinions. This word, then recently coined for the Emperor Alexander, proceeded into the language, I believe, by way of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> de Staël through Benjamin Constant.</p>
			<p>After that fatal evening the unhappy young man took to haunting one of the most picturesque walks along the Sarthe; every artist who comes to Alençon sketches it from that point of view, for the sake of the watermills, and the river gleaming brightly out among the fields, between the shapely well-grown trees on either side. Flat though the land may be, it lacks none of the subdued peculiar charm of French landscape; for in France your eyes are never wearied by glaring Eastern sunlight, nor saddened by too continual mist. It is a lonely spot. Dwellers in the provinces care nothing for beautiful scenery, perhaps because it is always about them, perhaps because there is a sense lacking in them. If there is such a thing as a promenade, a mall, or any spot from which you see a beautiful view, it is sure to be the one unfrequented part of the town. Athanase liked the loneliness, with the water like a living presence in it, and the fields just turning green in the warmth of the early spring sunlight. Occasionally someone who had seen him sitting at a poplar foot, and received an intent gaze from his eyes, would speak to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson about him.</p>
			<p>“There is something the matter with your son.”</p>
			<p>“I know what he is about,” the mother would say with a satisfied air, hinting that he was meditating some great work.</p>
			<p>Athanase meddled no more in politics; he had no opinions; and yet, now and again, he was merry enough, merry at the expense of others, after the wont of those who stand alone and apart in contempt of public opinion. The young fellow lived so entirely outside the horizon of provincial ideas and amusements, that he was interesting to few people; he did not so much as rouse curiosity. Those who spoke of him to his mother did so for her sake, not for his. Not a creature in Alençon sympathized with Athanase; the Sarthe received the tears which no friend, no loving woman dried. If the magnificent Suzanne had chanced to pass that way, how much misery might have been prevented⁠—the two young creatures would have fallen in love.</p>
			<p>And yet Suzanne certainly passed that way. Her ambition had been first awakened by a sufficiently marvelous tale of things which happened in 1799; an old story of adventures begun at the sign of the Three Moors had turned her childish brain. They used to tell how an adventuress, beautiful as an angel, had come from Paris with a commission from Fouché to ensnare the Marquis de Montauran, the Chouan leader sent over by the Bourbons; how she met him at that very inn of the Three Moors as he came back from his Mortagne expedition; and how she won his love, and gave him up to his enemies. The romantic figure of this woman, the power of beauty, the whole story of Marie de Verneuil and the Marquis de Montauran, dazzled Suzanne, till, as she grew older, she too longed to play with men’s lives. A few months after the flight, she could not resist the desire to see her native place again, on her way to Brittany with an artist. She wanted to see Fougères, where the Marquis de Montauran met his death; and thought of making a pilgrimage to the scenes of stories told to her in childhood of that War in the West, so little known even yet. She wished, besides, to revisit Alençon with such splendor in her surroundings, and so completely metamorphosed, that nobody should know her again. She intended to put her mother beyond the reach of want in one moment, and, in some tactful way to send a sum of money to poor Athanase⁠—a sum which for genius in modern days is the equivalent of a Rebecca’s gift of horse and armor to an Ivanhoe of the Middle Ages.</p>
			<p>A month went by. Opinions as to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s marriage fluctuated in the strangest way. There was an incredulous section which strenuously denied the truth of the report, and a party of believers who persistently affirmed it. At the end of a fortnight, the doubters received a severe check. Du Bousquier’s house was sold to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville for forty-three thousand francs. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Troisville meant to live quite quietly in Alençon; he intended to return to Paris after the death of the Princess Scherbelloff, but until the inheritance fell in he would spend his time in looking after his estates. This much appeared to be fact. But the doubting faction declined to be crushed. Their assertion was that, married or no, du Bousquier had done a capital stroke of business, for his house only stood him in a matter of twenty-seven thousand francs. The believers were taken aback by this peremptory decision on the part of their opponents. “Choisnel, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s notary, had not heard a word of marriage settlements,” added the incredulous.</p>
			<p>But on the twentieth day the unshaken believers enjoyed a signal victory over the doubters. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Lepresseur, the Liberal notary, went to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s house, and the contract was signed. This was the first of many sacrifices which Rose made to her husband. The fact was that du Bousquier detested Choisnel; he blamed the notary for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande’s refusal in the first place, as well as for his previous rejection by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon, who, as he believed, had followed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande’s example. He managed <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon so well, that she, noble-hearted woman, believing that she had misjudged her future husband, wished to make reparation for her doubts, and sacrificed her notary to her love. Still she submitted the contract to Choisnel, and he⁠—a man worthy of Plutarch⁠—defended <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s interests by letter. This was the one cause of delay.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon received a good many anonymous letters. She was informed, to her no small astonishment, that Suzanne was as honest a woman as she was herself; and that the seducer in the false toupet could not possibly have played the part assigned to him in such an adventure. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon scorned anonymous letters; she wrote, however, to Suzanne with a view to gaining light on the creeds of the Maternity Society. Suzanne probably had heard of du Bousquier’s approaching marriage; she confessed to her stratagem, sent a thousand francs to the Fund, and damaged the forage-contractor’s character very considerably. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon called an extraordinary meeting of the Maternity Charity, and the assembled matrons passed a resolution that henceforward the Fund should give help after and not before misfortunes befell.</p>
			<p>In spite of these proceedings, which supplied the town with tidbits of gossip to discuss, the banns were published at the church and the major’s office. It was Athanase’s duty to make out the needful documents. The betrothed bride had gone to the Prébaudet, a measure taken partly by way of conventional modesty, partly for general security. Thither du Bousquier went every morning, fortified by atrocious and sumptuous bouquets, returning in the evening to dinner.</p>
			<p>At last, one gray rainy day in June, the wedding took place; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon and the Sieur du Bousquier, as the incredulous faction called him, were married at the parish church in the sight of all Alençon. Bride and bridegroom drove to the mayor’s office, and afterwards to the church, in a calèche⁠—a splendid equipage for Alençon. Du Bousquier had it sent privately from Paris. The loss of the old cariole was a kind of calamity for the whole town. The saddler of the Porte de Séez lost an income of fifty francs per annum for repairs; he lifted up his voice and wept. With dismay the town of Alençon beheld the luxury introduced by the Maison Cormon; everyone feared a rise of prices all round, an increase of house rent, an invasion of Paris furniture. There were some whose curiosity pricked them to the point of giving Jacquelin ten sous for a nearer sight of so startling an innovation in a thrifty province. A pair of Normandy horses likewise caused much concern.</p>
			<p>“If we buy horses for ourselves in this way, we shall not sell them long to those that come to buy of us,” said du Ronceret’s set.</p>
			<p>The reasoning seemed profound, stupid though it was, in so far as it prevented the district from securing a monopoly of money from outside. In the political economy of the provinces the wealth of nations consists not so much in a brisk circulation of money as in hoards of unproductive coin.</p>
			<p>At length the old maid’s fatal wish was fulfilled. Penelope sank under the attack of pleurisy contracted forty days before the wedding. Nothing could save her. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, Mariette, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Coudrai, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Ronceret⁠—the whole town, in fact⁠—noticed that the bride came into church with the left foot foremost, an omen all the more alarming because the word Left even then had acquired a political significance. The officiating priest chanced to open the mass-book at the De profundis. And so the wedding passed off, amid presages so ominous, so gloomy, so overwhelming, that nobody was found to augur well of it. Things went from bad to worse. There was no attempt at a wedding party; the bride and bridegroom started out for the Prébaudet. Paris fashions were to supplant old customs! In the evening Alençon said its say as to all these absurdities; some persons had reckoned upon one of the usual provincial jollifications, which they considered they had a right to expect, and these spoke their minds pretty freely. But Mariette and Jacquelin had a merry wedding, and they alone in all Alençon gainsaid the dismal prophecies.</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier wished to spend the profit made by the sale of his house on restoring and modernizing the Hôtel Cormon. He had quite made up his mind to stay for some months at the Prébaudet, whither he brought his uncle de Sponde. The news spread dismay through Alençon; everyone felt that du Bousquier was about to draw the country into the downward path of domestic comfort. The foreboding grew to a fear one morning when du Bousquier drove over from the Prébaudet to superintend his workmen at the Val-Noble; and the townspeople beheld a tilbury, harnessed to a new horse, and René in livery by his master’s side. Du Bousquier had invested his wife’s savings in the funds which stood at sixty-seven francs fifty centimes. This was the first act of the new administration. In the space of one year, by constantly speculating for a rise, he made for himself a fortune almost as considerable as his wife’s. But something else happened in connection with this marriage to make it seem yet more inauspicious, and put all previous overwhelming portents and alarming innovations into the background.</p>
			<p>It was the evening of the wedding day. Athanase and his mother were sitting in the salon by the little fire of brushwood (or <i xml:lang="fr">régalades</i>, as they say in the patois), which the servant had lighted after dinner.</p>
			<p>“Well,” said <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, “we will go to President du Ronceret’s tonight, now that we have no <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon. Goodness me! I shall never get used to calling her <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier; that name makes my lips sore.”</p>
			<p>Athanase looked at his mother with a sad constraint; he could not smile, and he wanted to acknowledge, as it were, the artless thoughtfulness which soothed the wound it could not heal.</p>
			<p>“Mamma,” he began⁠—it was several years since he had used that word, and his tones were so gentle that they sounded like the voice of his childhood⁠—“mamma, dear, do not let us go out just yet; it is so nice here by the fire!”</p>
			<p>It was a supreme cry of mortal anguish; the mother heard it and did not understand.</p>
			<p>“Let us stay, child,” she said. “I would certainly rather talk with you and listen to your plans than play at boston and perhaps lose my money.”</p>
			<p>“You are beautiful tonight; I like to look at you. And besides, the current of my thoughts is in harmony with this poor little room, where we have been through so much trouble you and I.”</p>
			<p>“And there is still more in store for us, poor Athanase, until your work succeeds. For my own part, I am used to poverty; but, oh, my treasure, to look on and see your youth go by while you have no joy of it! Nothing but work in your life! That thought is like a disease for a mother. It tortures me night and morning. I wake up to it. Ah, God in heaven! what have I done? What sin of mine is punished with this?”</p>
			<p>She left her seat, took a little chair, and sat down beside Athanase, nestling close up to his side, till she could lay her head on her child’s breast. Where a mother is truly a mother, the grace of love never dies. Athanase kissed her on the eyes, on the gray hair, on the forehead, with the reverent love that fain would lay the soul where the lips are laid.</p>
			<p>“I shall never succeed,” he said, trying to hide the fatal purpose which he was revolving in his mind.</p>
			<p>“Pooh! you are not going to be discouraged? Mind can do all things, as you say. With ten bottles of ink, ten reams of paper, and a strong will, Luther turned Europe upside down. Well, and you are going to make a great name for yourself; you are going to use to good ends the powers which he used for evil. Did you not say so? Now <em>I</em> remember what you say, you see; I understand much more than you think; for you still lie so close under my heart, that your least little thought thrills through it, as your slightest movement did once.”</p>
			<p>“I shall not succeed <em>here</em>, you see, mamma, and I will not have you looking on while I am struggling and heartsore and in anguish. Mother, let me leave Alençon; I want to go through it all away from you.”</p>
			<p>“<em>I</em> want to be at your side always,” she said proudly. “Suffering alone! <em>you</em> without your mother! your poor mother that would be your servant if need were, and keep out of sight for fear of injuring you, if you wished it, and never accuse you of pride! No, no, Athanase, we wall never be parted!”</p>
			<p>Athanase put his arms about her and held her with a passionate tight clasp, as a dying man might cling to life.</p>
			<p>“And yet I wish it,” he said. “If we do not part, it is all over with me.⁠ ⁠… The double pain⁠—yours and mine⁠—would kill me. It is better that I should live, is it not?”</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson looked with haggard eyes into her son’s face.</p>
			<p>“So this is what you have been brooding over! They said truth. Then you are going away?”</p>
			<p>“Yes.”</p>
			<p>“But you are not going until you have told me all about it, and without giving me any warning? You must have some things to take with you, and money. There are some louis d’or sewed into my petticoat; you must have them.”</p>
			<p>Athanase burst into tears.</p>
			<p>“That was all that I wanted to tell you,” he said after a while. “Now, I will see you to the President’s house.”</p>
			<p>Mother and son went out together. Athanase left <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson at the door of the house where she was to spend the evening. He looked long at the shafts of light that escaped through chinks in the shutters. He stood there glued to the spot, while a quarter of an hour went by, and it was with almost delirious joy that he heard his mother say, “Grand independence of hearts.”</p>
			<p>“Poor mother, I have deceived her!” he exclaimed to himself as he reached the river.</p>
			<p>He came down to the tall poplar on the bank where he had been wont to sit and meditate during the last six weeks. Two big stones lay there; he had brought them himself for a seat. And now, looking out over the fair landscape lying in the moonlight, he passed in review all the so glorious future that should have been his. He went through cities stirred to enthusiasm by his name; he heard the cheers of crowded streets, breathed the incense of banquets, looked with a great yearning over that life of his dreams, rose uplifted and radiant in glorious triumph, raised a statue to himself, summoned up all his illusions to bid them farewell in a last Olympian carouse. The magic could only last for a little while; it fled, it had vanished forever. In that supreme moment he clung to his beautiful tree as if it had been a friend; then he put the stones, one in either pocket, and buttoned his overcoat. His hat he had purposely left at home. He went down the bank to look for a deep spot which he had had in view for some time; and slid in resolutely, trying to make as little noise as possible. There was scarcely a sound.</p>
			<p>When <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson came home about half-past nine that night, the maid-of-all-work said nothing of Athanase, but handed her a letter. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson opened it and read:</p>
			<p>“I have gone away, my kind mother; do not think hardly of me.” That was all.</p>
			<p>“A pretty thing he has done!” cried she. “And how about his linen and the money? But he will write, and I shall find him. The poor children always think themselves wiser than their fathers and mothers.” And she went to bed with a quiet mind.</p>
			<p>The Sarthe had risen with yesterday’s rain. Fishers and anglers were prepared for this, for the swollen river washes down the eels from the little streams on its course. It so happened that an eel-catcher had set his lines over the very spot where poor Athanase had chosen to drown himself, thinking that he should never be heard of again; and next morning, about six o’clock, the man drew out the young dead body.</p>
			<p>One or two women among <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson’s few friends went to prepare the poor widow with all possible care to receive the dreadful yield of the river. The news of the suicide, as might be expected, produced a tremendous sensation. Only last evening the poverty-stricken man of genius had not a single friend; the morning after his death scores of voices cried, “I would so willingly have helped him!” So easy is it to play a charitable part when no outlay is involved. The Chevalier de Valois, in the spirit of revenge, explained the suicide. It was a boyish, sincere, and noble passion for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon that drove Athanase to take his own life. And when the Chevalier had opened <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson’s eyes, she saw a multitude of little things to confirm this view. The story grew touching; women cried over it.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson sorrowed with a dumb concentration of grief which few understood. For mothers there are two ways of bereavement. It often happens that everyone else can understand the greatness of her loss; her boy was admired and appreciated, young or handsome, with fair prospects before him or brilliant successes won already; everyone regrets him, everyone shares her mourning, and the grief that is widely spread is not so hard to bear. Then there is the loss that one understands. No one else knew her boy and all that he was; his smiles were for her alone; she, and she only, knew how much perished with that life, too early cut short. Such sorrow hides itself; beside that darkness other woe grows pale; no words can describe it; and, happily, there are not many women who know what it is to have those heartstrings finally severed.</p>
			<p>Even before <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier came back to town, her obliging friend, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Ronceret, went to fling a dead body down among the roses of her new-wedded happiness, to let her know what a love she had refused. Ever so gently the Présidente squeezed a shower of drops of wormwood over the honey of the first month of married life. And as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier returned, it so happened that she met <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson at the corner of the Val-Noble, and the look in the heartbroken mother’s eyes cut her to the quick. It was a look from a woman dying of grief, a thousand curses gathered up into one glance of malediction, a thousand sparks in one gleam of hate. It frightened <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier; it boded ill, and invoked ill upon her.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson had belonged to the party most opposed to the curé; she was a bitter partisan of the priest of <abbr>St.</abbr> Léonard’s; but on the very evening of the tragedy she thought of the rigid orthodoxy of her own party, and she shuddered. She herself laid her son in his shroud, thinking all the while of the Mother of the Saviour; then with a soul quivering with agony, she betook herself to the house of the perjured priest. She found him busy, the humble good man, storing the hemp and flax which he gave to poor women and girls to spin, so that no worker should ever want work, a piece of wise charity which had saved more than one family that could not endure to beg. He left his hemp at once and brought his visitor into the dining-room, where the stricken mother saw the frugality of her own housekeeping in the supper that stood waiting for the curé.</p>
			<p>“<abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> l’Abbé,” she began, “I have come to entreat you⁠—”</p>
			<p>She burst into tears, and could not finish the sentence.</p>
			<p>“I know why you have come,” answered the holy man, “and I trust to you, madame, and to your relative <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier to make it right with his Lordship at Séez. Yes, I will pray for your unhappy boy; yes, I will say masses; but we must avoid all scandal, we must give no occasion to ill-disposed people to gather together in the church.⁠ ⁠… I myself, alone, and at night⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Yes, yes, as you wish, if only he is laid in consecrated ground!” she said, poor mother; and taking the priest’s hand in hers, she kissed it.</p>
			<p>And so, just before midnight, a bier was smuggled into the parish church. Four young men, Athanase’s friends, carried it. There were a few little groups of veiled and black-clad women, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson’s friends, and some seven or eight lads that had been intimate with the dead. The bier was covered with a pall, torches were lit at the corners, and the curé read the office for the dead, with the help of one little choir boy whom he could trust. Then the suicide was buried, noiselessly, in a corner of the churchyard, and a dark wooden cross with no name upon it marked the grave for the mother.</p>
			<p>Athanase lived and died in the shadow.</p>
			<p>Not a voice was raised against the curé; his Lordship at Séez was silent; the mother’s piety redeemed her son’s impious deed.</p>
			<p>Months afterwards, moved by the inexplicable thirst of sorrow which drives the unhappy to steep their lips in their bitter cup, the poor woman went to see the place where her son drowned himself. Perhaps she felt instinctively that there were thoughts to be gathered under the poplar tree; perhaps, too, she longed to see all that his eyes had seen for the last time. The sight of the spot would kill many a mother; while again there are some who can kneel and worship there.⁠—There are truths on which the patient anatomist of human nature cannot insist too much; verities against which education and laws and systems of philosophy are shattered. It is absurd⁠—let us repeat it again and again⁠—to try to lay down hard-and-fast rules in matters of feeling; the personal element comes in to modify feeling as it arises, and a man’s character influences his most instinctive actions.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, by the riverside, saw a woman at some distance⁠—a woman who came nearer, till she reached the fatal spot, and exclaimed:</p>
			<p>“Then this is the place!”</p>
			<p>One other woman in the world wept there as the mother was weeping, and that woman was Suzanne. She had heard of the tragedy on her arrival that morning at the Three Moors. If poor Athanase had been alive, she might have done what poor and generous people dream of doing, and the rich never think of putting in practice; she would have enclosed a thousand francs with the words, “Money lent by your father to a comrade who now repays you.” During her journey Suzanne had thought of this angelic way of giving. She looked up and saw <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson.</p>
			<p>“I loved him,” she said; then she hurried away.</p>
			<p>Suzanne, true to her nature, did not leave Alençon till she had changed the bride’s wreath of orange flowers to waterlilies. She was the first to assert that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier would be <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon as long as she lived. And with one jibe she avenged both Athanase and the dear Chevalier de Valois.</p>
			<p>Alençon beheld another and more piteous suicide. Athanase was promptly forgotten by a world that willingly, and indeed of necessity, forgets its dead as soon as possible; but the poor Chevalier’s existence became a kind of death-in-life, a suicide continued morning after morning during fourteen years. Three months after du Bousquier’s marriage, people remarked, not without astonishment, that the Chevalier’s linen was turning yellow, and his hair irregularly combed. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois was no more, for a disheveled <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois could not be said to be himself. An ivory tooth here and there deserted from the ranks, and no student of human nature could discover to what corps they belonged, whether they were native or foreign, animal or vegetable; nor whether, finally, they had been extracted by old age, or were merely lying out of sight and out of mind in the Chevalier’s dressing-table drawer. His cravat was wisped, careless of elegance, into a cord. The negroes’ heads grew pale for lack of soap and water. The lines on the Chevalier’s face deepened into wrinkles and darkened as his complexion grew more and more like parchment; his neglected nails were sometimes adorned with an edge of black velvet. Grains of snuff lay scattered like autumn leaves in the furrows of his waistcoat. The cotton in his ears was but seldom renewed. Melancholy, brooding on his brow, spread her sallow hues through his wrinkles; in short, time’s ravages, hitherto so carefully repaired, began to appear in rifts and cracks in the noble edifice. Here was proof of the power of the mind over matter! The blond cavalier, the jeune premier, fell into decay when hope failed.</p>
			<p>Hitherto the Chevalier’s nose had made a peculiarly elegant appearance in public; never had it been seen to distil a drop of amber, to let fall a dark wafer of moist rappee; but now, with a snuff-bedabbled border about the nostrils, and an unsightly stream taking advantage of the channel hollowed above the upper lip, that nose, which no longer took pains to please, revealed the immense trouble that the Chevalier must have formerly taken with himself. In this neglect you saw the extent, the greatness and persistence of the man’s designs upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon. The Chevalier was crushed by a pun from du Coudrai, whose dismissal he however procured. It was the first instance of vindictiveness on the part of the urbane gentleman; but then the pun was atrocious, worse by a hundred cubits than any other ever made by the registrar of mortgages. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Coudrai, observing this nasal revolution, had nicknamed the Chevalier “Nerestan” (<i xml:lang="fr">nez-restant</i>).</p>
			<p>Latterly the Chevalier’s witticisms had been few and far between; the anecdotes went the way of the teeth, but his appetite continued as good as ever; out of the great shipwreck of hopes he saved nothing but his digestion; and while he took his snuff feebly, he despatched his dinner with an avidity alarming to behold. You may mark the extent of the havoc wrought in his ideas in the fact that his colloquies with the Princess Goritza grew less and less frequent. He came to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande’s one day with a false calf in front of his shins. The bankruptcy of elegance was something painful, I protest; all Alençon was shocked by it. It scared society to see an elderly young man drop suddenly into his dotage, and from sheer depression of spirits pass from fifty to ninety years. And besides, he had betrayed his secret. He had been waiting and lying in wait for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon. For ten long years, persevering sportsman that he was, he had been stalking the game, and he had missed his shot. The impotent Republic had won a victory over a valiant Aristocracy, and that in full flood of Restoration! The sham had triumphed over the real; spirit was vanquished by matter, diplomacy by insurrection; and as a final misfortune, a grisette in an outbreak of bad temper, let out the secret of the Chevalier’s levées!</p>
			<p>At once he became a man of the worst character. The Liberal party laid all du Bousquier’s foundlings on the Chevalier’s doorstep, while the Faubourg Saint-Germain of Alençon boastingly accepted them; laughed and cried, “The dear Chevalier! What else could he do?” Saint-Germain pitied the Chevalier, took him to its bosom, and smiled more than ever upon him; while an appalling amount of unpopularity was drawn down upon du Bousquier’s head. Eleven persons seceded from the salon Cormon and went over to the d’Esgrignons.</p>
			<p>But the especial result of the marriage was a more sharply-marked division of parties in Alençon. The Maison d’Esgrignon represented undiluted aristocracy; for the Troisvilles on their return joined the clique. The Maison Cormon, skilfully influenced by du Bousquier, was not exactly Liberal, nor yet resolutely Royalist, but of that unlucky shade of opinion which produced the 221 members, so soon as the political struggle took a definite shape, and the greatest, most august, and only real power of Kingship came into collision with that most false, fickle, and tyrannical power which, when wielded by an elective body, is known as the power of Parliament.</p>
			<p>The third salon, the salon du Ronceret, out and out Radical in its politics, was secretly allied with the Maison Cormon.</p>
			<hr/>
			<p>With the return from the Prébaudet, a life of continual suffering began for the Abbé de Sponde. He kept all that he endured locked within his soul, uttering not a word of complaint to his niece; but to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande he opened his heart, admitting that taking one folly with another, he should have preferred the Chevalier. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois would not have had the bad taste to thwart a feeble old man with but a few days to live. Du Bousquier had pulled the old home to pieces.</p>
			<p>“Mademoiselle,” the old Abbé said as the thin tears fell from his faded old eyes, “the lime-tree walk, where I have been used to meditate these fifty years, is gone. My dear lime-trees have all been cut down! Just as I am nearing the end of my days the Republic has come back again in the shape of a horrible revolution in the house.”</p>
			<p>“Your niece must be forgiven,” said the Chevalier de Valois. “Republicanism is a youthful error; youth goes out to seek for liberty, and finds tyranny in its worst form⁠—the tyranny of the impotent rabble. Your niece, poor thing, has not been punished by the thing wherein she sinned.”</p>
			<p>“What is to become of me in a house with naked women dancing all over the walls? Where shall I find the lime-tree walks where I used to read my breviary?”</p>
			<p>Like Kant, who lost the thread of his ideas when somebody cut down the fir-tree on which he fixed his eyes as he meditated, the good Abbé pacing up and down the shadowless alleys could not say his prayers with the same uplifting of soul. Du Bousquier had laid out an English garden!</p>
			<p>“It looked nicer,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier said. Not that she really thought so, but the Abbé Couturier had authorized her to say and do a good many things that she might please her husband.</p>
			<p>With the restoration, all the glory departed from the old house, and all its quaint, cheerful, old-world look. If the Chevalier de Valois’ neglect of his person might be taken as a sort of abdication, the bourgeois majesty of the salon Cormon passed away when the drawing-room was decorated with white and gold; and blue silk curtains and mahogany ottomans made their appearance. In the dining-room, fitted up in the modern style, the dishes were somehow not so hot, nor the dinners quite what they had been. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Coudrai said that the puns stuck fast in his throat when he saw the painted figures on the walls and felt their eyes upon him. Without, the house was provincial as ever; within, the forage-contractor of the Directory made himself everywhere felt. All over the house you saw the stockbroker’s bad taste; stucco pilasters, glass doors, classic cornices, arid decoration⁠—a medley of every imaginable style and ill-assorted magnificence.</p>
			<p>Alençon criticised such unheard-of luxury for a fortnight, and grew proud of it at the end of a few months. Several rich manufacturers refurnished their houses in consequence, and set up fine drawing-rooms. Modern furniture made its appearance; astral lamps might even be seen in some places.</p>
			<p>The Abbé de Sponde was the first to see the unhappiness which lay beneath the surface of his dear child’s married life. The old dignified simplicity which ruled their way of living was gone; du Bousquier gave two balls every month in the course of the first winter. The venerable house⁠—oh, to think of it!⁠—echoed with the sound of violins and worldly gaiety. The Abbé, on his knees, prayed while the merriment lasted.</p>
			<p>The politics of the sober salon underwent a gradual change for the worse. The Abbé de Sponde divined du Bousquier; he shuddered at his nephew’s dictatorial tone. He saw tears in his niece’s eyes when the disposal of her fortune was taken out of her hands; her husband left her only the control of the linen, the table, and such things as fall to a woman’s lot. Rose had no more orders to give. Jacquelin, now coachman exclusively, took his orders from no one but his master; René, the groom, did likewise, so did the man-cook imported from Paris; Mariette was only the kitchen-maid; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier had no one to tyrannize over but Josette.</p>
			<p>Does anyone know how much it costs to give up the delicious exercise of authority? If the triumph of will is one of the most intoxicating of the great man’s joys, to have one’s own way is the whole life of narrow natures. No one but a cabinet minister fallen into disgrace can sympathize with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier’s bitter pain when she saw herself reduced to a cipher in her own house. She often drove out when she would rather have stayed at homo; she saw company which she did not like; she who had been free to spend as she pleased, and had never spent at all, had lost the control of the money which she loved. Impose limits, and who does not wish to go beyond them? Is there any sharper suffering than that which comes of thwarted will?</p>
			<p>But these beginnings were the roses of life. Every concession was counseled by poor Rose’s love for her husband, and at first du Bousquier behaved admirably to his wife. He was very good to her; he brought forward sufficient reasons for every encroachment. The room, so long left empty, echoed with the voices of husband and wife in fireside talk. And so, for the first few years of married life, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier wore a face of content, and that little air of emancipation and mystery often seen in a young wife after a marriage of love. She had no more trouble with “heated blood.” This countenance of hers routed scoffers, gave the lie to gossip concerning du Bousquier, and put observers of human nature at fault.</p>
			<p>Rose Marie Victoire was so afraid lest she should lose her husband’s affection or drive him from her side by setting her will against his, that she would have made any sacrifice, even of her uncle if need be. And the Abbé de Sponde, deceived by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier’s poor foolish little joys, bore his own discomforts the more easily for the thought that his niece was happy.</p>
			<p>At first Alençon shared this impression. But there was one man less easy to deceive than all the rest of Alençon put together. The Chevalier de Valois had taken refuge on the Mons Sacer of the most aristocratic section, and spent his time with the d’Esgrignons. He lent an ear to the scandal and tittle-tattle; night and day he studied how to have his revenge before he died. The perpetrator of puns had been already brought low, and he meant to stab du Bousquier to the heart.</p>
			<p>The poor Abbé, knowing as he did the cowardliness of his niece’s first and last love, shuddered as he guessed his nephew’s hypocritical nature and the man’s intrigues. Du Bousquier, be it said, put some constraint upon himself; he had an eye to the Abbé’s property, and had no wish to annoy his wife’s uncle in any way, yet he dealt the old man his deathblow.</p>
			<p>If you can translate the word Intolerance by Firmness of Principle; if you can forbear to condemn in the old Roman Catholic Vicar-General that stoicism which Scott has taught us to revere in Jeanie Deans’ Puritan father; if, finally, you can recognize in the Roman Church the nobility of a <i xml:lang="la">Potius mori quam foedari</i> which you admire in a Republican⁠—then you can understand the anguish that rent the great Abbé de Sponde when he saw the apostate in his nephew’s drawing-room; when he was compelled to meet the renegade, the backslider, the enemy of the Church, the aider and abettor of the Oath to the Constitution. It was du Bousquier’s private ambition to lord it over the countryside; and as a first proof of his power, he determined to reconcile the officiating priest of <abbr class="eoc">St.</abbr></p>
			<p>Léonard’s with the curé of Alençon. He gained his object. His wife imagined that peace had been made where the stern Abbé saw no peace, but surrender of principle. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Sponde was left alone in the faith. The Bishop came to du Bousquier’s house, and appeared satisfied with the cessation of hostilities. The Abbé François’ goodness had conquered everyone⁠—everyone except the old Roman of the Roman Church, who might have cried with Cornélie, “Ah, God! what virtues you make me hate!” The Abbé de Sponde died when orthodoxy expired in the diocese.</p>
			<p>In 1819 the Abbé de Sponde’s property raised <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier’s income from land to twenty-five thousand livres without counting the Prébaudet or the house in the Val-Noble. About the same time du Bousquier returned the amount of his wife’s savings (which she had made over to him), and instructed her to invest the moneys in purchases of land near the Prébaudet, so that the estate, including the Abbé de Sponde’s adjoining property, was one of the largest in the department. As for du Bousquier, he invested his money with the Kellers, and made a journey to Paris four times a year. Nobody knew the exact amount of his private fortune, but at this time he was supposed to be one of the wealthiest men in the department of the Orne. A dexterous man, and the permanent candidate of the Liberal party, he always lost his election by seven or eight votes under the Restoration. Ostensibly he repudiated his connection with the Liberals, offering himself as a Ministerial-Royalist candidate; but although he succeeded in gaining the support of the Congregation and of the magistrature, the repugnance of the administration was too strong to be overcome.</p>
			<p>Then the rabid Republican, frantic with ambition, conceived the idea of beginning a struggle with the Royalism and Aristocracy of the country, just as they were carrying all before them. He gained the support of the clergy by an appearance of piety very skilfully kept up; always going with his wife to mass, giving money to the convents, and supporting the confraternity of the Sacre-Coeur; and whenever a dispute arose between the clergy and the town, or the department, or the State, he was very careful to take the clerical side. And so, while secretly supported by the Liberals, he gained the influence of the Church; and as a Constitutional-Royalist kept close beside the aristocratic section, the better to ruin it. And ruin it he did. He was always on the watch for any mistake on the part of those high in rank or in office under the Government; with the support of the bourgeoisie he carried out all the improvements which the nobles and officials ought to have undertaken and directed, if the imbecile jealousies of place had not frustrated their efforts. Constitutional opinion carried him through in the affair of the curé, in the theatre question, and in all the various schemes of improvement which du Bousquier first prompted the Liberals to make, and afterwards supported in the course of debate, declaring himself in favor of any measures for the good of the country. He brought about an industrial revolution; and his detestation of certain families on the highroad to Brittany rapidly increased the material prosperity of the province.</p>
			<p>And so he paved the way for his revenge upon the <i xml:lang="fr">gens a châteaux</i> in general, and the d’Esgrignons in particular: some day, not so very far distant, he would plunge a poisoned blade into the very heart of the clique. He found capital to revive the manufacture of point d’Alençon and to increase the linen trade. Alençon began to spin its own flax by machinery. And while his name was associated with all these interests, and written in the hearts of the masses, while he did all that Royalty left undone, du Bousquier risked not a farthing of his own. With his means, he could afford to wait while enterprising men with little capital were obliged to give up and leave the results of their labors to luckier successors. He posed as a banker. A Laffitte on a small scale, he became a sleeping partner in all new inventions, taking security for his money. And as a public benefactor, he did remarkably well for himself. He was a promoter of insurance companies, a patron of new public conveyances; ho got up memorials for necessary roads and bridges. The authorities, being left behind in this way, regarded this activity in the light of an encroachment; they blundered, and put themselves in the wrong, for the prefecture was obliged to give way for the good of the country.</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier embittered the provincial noblesse against the court nobles and the peerage. He helped, in short, to bring it to pass that a very large body of Constitutional-Royalists supported the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper" xml:lang="fr">Journal des Débats</i> and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Chateaubriand in a contest with the throne. It was an ungrateful opposition based on ignoble motives which contributed to bring about the triumph of the bourgeoisie and the press in 1830. Wherefore du Bousquier, like those whom he represented, had the pleasure of watching a funeral procession of royalty<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-3" id="noteref-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> pass through their district without a single demonstration of sympathy from a population alienated from them in ways so numerous that they cannot be indicated here.</p>
			<p>Then the old Republican, with all that weight of masses on his conscience, hauled down the white flag above the townhall amid the applause of the people. For fifteen years he had acted a part to satisfy his vendetta, and no man in France beholding the new throne raised in August 1830 could feel more intoxicated than he with the joy of revenge. For him, the succession of the younger branch meant the triumph of the Revolution; for him, the hoisting of the Tricolor flag was the resurrection of the Mountain; and <em>this</em> time the nobles should be brought low by a surer method than the guillotine, in that its action should be less violent. A peerage for life only; a National Guard which stretches the marquis and the grocer from the corner shop on the same camp bed; the abolition of entail demanded by a bourgeois barrister; a Catholic Church deprived of its supremacy; in short, all the legislative inventions of August 1830 simply meant for du Bousquier the principles of 1793 carried out in a most ingenious manner.</p>
			<p>Du Bousquier has been receiver-general of taxes since 1830. He relied for success upon his old connections with Egalité Orléans (father of Louis Philippe) and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Folman, steward of the Dowager Duchess. He is supposed to have an in come of eighty thousand livres. In the eyes of his fellow-countrymen, <em>Monsieur</em> du Bousquier is a man of substance, honorable, upright, obliging, unswerving in his principles. To him, Alençon owes her participation in the industrial movement which makes her, as it were, the first link in a chain which some day perhaps may bind Brittany to the state of things which we nickname “modern civilization.” In 1816 Alençon boasted but two carriages, properly speaking; ten years afterwards, calèches, coupés, landaus, cabriolets, and tilburies were rolling about the streets without causing any astonishment. At first the townsmen and landowners were alarmed by the rise of prices, afterwards they discovered that the increased expenditure produced a corresponding increase in their incomes.</p>
			<p>Du Ronceret’s prophetic words, “Du Bousquier is a very strong man,” were now taken up by the country. But, unfortunately for du Bousquier’s wife, the remark is a shocking misnomer. Du Bousquier the husband is a very different person from du Bousquier the public man and politician. The great citizen, so liberal in his opinions, so easy humored, so full of love for his country is a despot at home, and has not a particle of love for his wife. The Cromwell of the Val-Noble is profoundly astute, hypocritical, and crafty; he behaves to those of his own household as he behaved to the aristocrats on whom he fawned, until he could cut their throats. Like his friend Bernadotte, he has an iron hand in a velvet glove. His wife gave him no children. Suzanne’s epigram, and the Chevalier de Valois’ insinuations, were justified; but the Liberals and Constitutional-Royalists among the townspeople, the little squires, the magistrature, and the “clericals” (as the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper" xml:lang="fr">Constitutionnel</i> used to say), all threw the blame upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Bousquier had married such an elderly wife, they said; and besides, how lucky it was for her, poor thing, for at her age bearing a child meant such a risk. If, in periodically recurrent despair, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier confided her troubles with tears to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Coudrai or <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Ronceret⁠—</p>
			<p>“Why you must be mad, dear!” those ladies would reply. “You do not know what you want; a child would be the death of you.”</p>
			<p>Men like <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> du Coudrai, who followed du Bousquier’s lead because they fastened their hopes to his success, would prompt their wives to sing du Bousquier’s praises; and Rose must listen to speeches that wounded like a stab.</p>
			<p>“You are very fortunate, dear, to have such a capable husband; some men have no energy, and can neither manage their own property nor bring up their children; you are spared these troubles.”</p>
			<p>Or, “Your husband is making you queen of the district, fair lady. <em>He</em> will never leave you at a loss; he does everything in Alençon.”</p>
			<p>“But I should like him to take less trouble for the public and rather⁠—”</p>
			<p>“My dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier, you are very hard to please; all the women envy you your husband.”</p>
			<p>Unjustly treated by a world which condemned her without a hearing, she found ample scope for the exercise of Christian virtues in her inner life. She who lived in tears always turned a serene face upon the world. For her, pious soul, was there not sin in the thought which was always pecking at her heart⁠—“I loved the Chevalier de Valois, and I am du Bousquier’s wife!” Athanase’s love rose up like a remorse to haunt her dreams. After her uncle’s death and the revelation of all that he had suffered, the future grew yet more dreadful as she thought how grieved he would have been by such, changes of political and religious doctrine. Unhappiness often falls like a thunderbolt, as upon <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, for instance; but Rose’s misery gradually widened out before her as a drop of oil spreads over stuff, slowly saturating every fibre.</p>
			<p>The Chevalier de Valois was the malignant artificer of her misfortune. He had it on his mind to snatch his opportunity and undeceive <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier as to one of her articles oi faith; for the Chevalier, a man of experience, saw through du Bousquier the married man, as he had seen through du Bousquier the bachelor. But it was not easy to take the astute Republican by surprise. His salon, naturally, was closed to the Chevalier de Valois, as to all others who discontinued their visits to the Maison Cormon at the time of his marriage. And besides, du Bousquier was above the reach of ridicule; he possessed an immense fortune, he was king of Alençon; and as for his wife, he cared about her much as Richard <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span> might have cared for the loss of the horse with which he thought to win the battle. To please her husband, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier had broken with the Maison d’Esgrignon, but sometimes, when he was away at Paris for a few days, she paid <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande a visit.</p>
			<p>Two years after <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier’s marriage, just at the time of the Abbé’s death. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande went up to her as she came out of church. Both women had been to <abbr>St.</abbr> Léonard’s to hear a <i xml:lang="fr">messe noire</i> said for <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Sponde; and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande, a generous-natured woman, thinking that she ought to try to comfort the weeping heiress, walked with her as far as the Parade. From the Parade, still talking of the beloved and lost, they came to the forbidden Hôtel d’Esgrignon, and <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande drew <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier into the house by the charm of her talk. Perhaps the poor brokenhearted woman loved to speak of her uncle with someone whom her uncle had loved so well. And besides, she wished to receive the old Marquis’ greetings after an interval of nearly three years. It was half-past one o’clock; the Chevalier de Valois had come to dinner, and with a bow he held out both hands.</p>
			<p>“Ah! well, dear, good, and well-beloved lady,” he said tremulously, “<em>we</em> have lost our sainted friend. Your mourning is ours. Yes; your loss is felt as deeply here as under your roof⁠—more deeply,” he added, alluding to du Bousquier.</p>
			<p>A funeral oration followed, to which everyone contributed his phrase; then the Chevalier, gallantly taking the lady’s hand, drew it under his arm, pressed it in the most adorable way, and led her aside into the embrasure of a window.</p>
			<p>“You are happy, at any rate?” he asked with a fatherly tone in his voice.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” she said, lowering her eyes.</p>
			<p>Hearing that “Yes,” <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> de Troisville (daughter of the Princess Scherbelloff) and the old Marquise de Castéran came up; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande also joined them, and the group took a turn in the garden till dinner should be ready. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier was so stupid with grief that she did not notice that a little conspiracy of curiosity was on foot among the ladies.</p>
			<p>“We have her here, let us find out the answer to the riddle,” the glances exchanged among them seemed to say.</p>
			<p>“You should have children to make your happiness complete,” began <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande, “a fine boy like my nephew⁠—”</p>
			<p>Tears came to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier’s eyes.</p>
			<p>“I have heard it said that it was entirely your own fault if you had none,” said the Chevalier, “that you were afraid of the risk.”</p>
			<p>“<em>I!</em>“, she cried, innocently; “I would endure a hundred years in hell to have a child.”</p>
			<p>The subject thus broached, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> la Vicomtesse de Troisville and the dowager Marquise de Castéran steered the conversation with such exceeding tact, that they entangled poor Rose until, all unsuspectingly, she revealed the secrets of her married life. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Armande laid her hand on the Chevalier’s arm, and they left the three matrons to talk confidentially. Then <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier’s mind was disabused with regard to the deception of her marriage; and as she was still “a natural,” she amused her confidantes with her irresistible naivete. Before long the whole town was in the secret of du Bousquier’s manoeuvres, and knew that <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon’s marriage was a mockery; but after the first burst of laughter, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier gained the esteem and sympathy of every woman in it. While <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon rushed unsuccessfully at opportunities of establishing herself, everyone had laughed; but people admired her when they knew the position in which she was placed by the severity of her religious principles. “Poor, dear <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon!” was replaced by “poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier I”</p>
			<p>In this way the Chevalier made du Bousquier both ridiculous and very unpopular for a while, but the ridicule died down with time; the slander languished when everybody had cut his joke; and besides, it seemed to many persons that the mute Republican had a right to retire at the age of fifty-seven. But if du Bousquier previously hated the Maison d’Esgrignon, this incident so increased his rancor that he was pitiless afterwards in the day of vengeance. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier received orders never to set foot in that house again; and by way of reprisals, he inserted the following paragraph in the Orne Courier, his own new paper:</p>
			<blockquote>
				<p>“<b>A Reward</b> of rente to bring in a thousand francs will be paid to any person who shall prove that one <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Pombreton existed either before or after the Emigration.”</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Though <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier’s happiness was essentially negative, she saw that her marriage had its advantages. Was it not better to take an interest in the most remarkable man in the place than to live alone? After all, du Bousquier was better than the dogs, cats, and canaries on which old maids centre their affections; and his feeling for his wife was something more genuine and disinterested than the attachment of servants, confessors, and legacy-hunters. At a still later period she looked upon her husband as an instrument in God’s hands to punish her for the innumerable sins which she discovered in her desires for marriage; she regarded herself as justly rewarded for the misery which she had brought on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> Granson, and for hastening her own uncle’s end. Obedient to a religious faith which bade her kiss the rod, she praised her husband in public; but in the confessional, or over her prayers at night, she often wept and entreated God to pardon the apostate who said one thing and thought another, who wished for the destruction of the order of nobles and the Church, the two religions of the Maison Cormon. Living in an uncongenial atmosphere, compelled to suppress herself, compelled likewise by a sense of duty to make her husband happy, and to injure him in nothing, she became attached to him with an indefinable affection, perhaps the result of use and wont. Her life was a perpetual contradiction. She felt the strongest aversion for the conduct and opinions of the man she had married, and yet it was her duty to take a tender interest in him; and if, as often happened, du Bousquier ate her preserves, or thought that the dinner was good, she was in the seventh heaven. She saw that his comfort was secured even in the smallest details. If he left the wrapper of his newspaper on the table, there it must remain.</p>
			<p>“Leave it, René,” she would say, “the master had some reason for putting it there.”</p>
			<p>Did du Bousquier go on a journey? She fidgeted over his traveling cloak and his linen; she took the most minute precautions for his material comfort. If he was going over to the Prébaudet, she began to consult the weather glass twenty-four hours beforehand. A sleeping dog has eyes and ears for his master, and so it was with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier; she used to watch the expression of her husband’s face to read his wishes. And if that burly personage, vanquished by duty-prescribed love, caught her by the waist and kissed her on the forehead, exclaiming, “You are a good woman!” tears of joy filled the poor creature’s eyes. It is probable that du Bousquier felt it incumbent upon him to make compensations which won Rose Marie Victoire’s respect; for the Church does not require that an assumption of wifely devotion should be carried quite so far as <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier thought necessary. And yet when she listened to the rancorous talk of men who took Constitutional-Royalism as a cloak for their real opinions, the woman of saintly life uttered not a word. She foresaw the downfall of the Church, and shuddered. Very occasionally she would hazard some foolish remark, promptly cut in two by a look from du Bousquier. In the end this life at cross-purposes had a benumbing influence on <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier’s wits; she found it both simpler and more dignified to keep her mind to herself, and led outwardly a mere animal existence. She grew slavishly submissive, making a virtue of the abject condition to which her husband had reduced her; she did her husband’s will without murmuring in the least. The timid sheep walked in the way marked out by the shepherd; never leaving the bosom of the Church, practising austerities, without a thought of the Devil, his pomps and works. And so, within herself she united the purest Christian virtues, and du Bousquier truly was one of the luckiest men in the kingdom of France and Navarre.</p>
			<p>“She will be a simpleton till her last sigh,” said the cruel ex-registrar (now cashiered). But, all the same, he dined at her table twice a week.</p>
			<p>The story would be singularly incomplete if it omitted to mention a last coincidence; the Chevalier de Valois and Suzanne’s mother died at the same time.</p>
			<p>The Chevalier died with the Monarchy in August 1830. He went to Nonancourt to join the funeral procession; piously making one of the King’s escort to Cherbourg, with the Troisvilles, Castérans, d’Esgrignons, Verneuils, and the rest. He had brought with him his little hoard of savings and the principal which brought him in his annual income, some fifty thousand francs in all, which he offered to a faithful friend of the elder branch to convey to His Majesty. His own death was very near, he said; the money had come to him through the King’s bounty; and, after all, the property of the last of the Valois belonged to the Crown. History does not say whether the Chevalier’s fervent zeal overcame the repugnance of the Bourbon who left his fair kingdom of France without taking one farthing into exile; but the King surely must have been touched by the old noble’s devotion; and this much is at least certain⁠—Césarine, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> de Valois’ universal legatee, inherited scarcely six hundred livres of income at his death. The Chevalier came back to Alençon, brokenhearted and spent with the fatigue of the journey, to die just as Charles <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span> set foot on foreign soil.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Val-Noble and her journalist protector, fearing reprisals from the Liberals, were glad of an excuse to return incognito to the village where the old mother died. Suzanne attended the sale of the Chevalier’s furniture to buy some relic of her first good friend, and ran up the price of the snuffbox to the enormous amount of a thousand francs. The Princess Goritza’s portrait alone was worth that sum. Two years afterwards, a young man of fashion, struck with its marvelous workmanship, obtained it of Suzanne for his collection of fine eighteenth century snuffboxes; and so the delicate toy which had been the confidant of the most courtly of love affairs, and the delight of an old age till its very end, is now brought into the semi-publicity of a collection. If the dead could know what is done after they are gone, there would be a flush at this moment on the Chevalier’s left cheek.</p>
			<p>If this history should inspire owners of sacred relics with a holy fear, and set them drafting codicils to provide for the fate of such precious souvenirs of a happiness now no more, by giving them into sympathetic hands; even so an enormous service would have been rendered to the chivalrous and sentimental section of the public; but it contains another and a much more exalted moral.⁠ ⁠… Does it not show that a new branch of education is needed? Is it not an appeal to the so enlightened solicitude of Ministers of Public Instruction to create chairs of anthropology, a science in which Germany is outstripping us?</p>
			<p>Modern myths are even less understood of the people than ancient myths, eaten up with myths though we may be. Fables crowd in upon us on every side, allegory is pressed into service on all occasions to explain everything. If fables are the torches of history, as the humanist school maintains, they may be a means of securing empires from revolution, if only professors of history will undertake that their interpretations thereof shall permeate the masses in the departments. If <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mlle.</abbr> Cormon had had some knowledge of literature; if there had been a professor of anthropology in the department of the Orne; if (a final if) she had read her Ariosto, would the appalling misfortune of her marriage have befallen her? She would, perhaps, have found out for herself why the Italian poet makes his heroine Angelica prefer Medoro (a suave Chevalier de Valois) to Orlando, who had lost his mare, and could do nothing but work himself into a fury. Might not Medoro be taken as an allegorical figure as the courtier of woman’s sovereignty, whereas Orlando is revolution personified, an undisciplined, furious, purely destructive force, incapable of producing anything? This is the opinion of one of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">M.</abbr> Ballanche’s pupils; we publish it, declining all responsibility.</p>
			<p>As for the tiny negroes’ heads, no information of any kind concerning them is forthcoming. <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Val-Noble you may see any day at the Opéra. Thanks to the primary education given to her by the Chevalier de Valois, she looks almost like a woman who makes a necessity of virtue, while in truth she only exists by virtue of necessity.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Bousquier is still living, which is to say, is it not, that her troubles are not yet over? At sixty, when women can permit themselves to make admissions, talking confidentially to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mme.</abbr> du Coudrai, whose husband was reinstated in August 1830, she said that the thought that she must die without knowing what it was to be a wife and mother was more than she could bear.</p>
		</article>
	</body>
</html>
